Host: This is News & Notes. I'm Tony Cox. The battle is going to be fierce. President Obama has pledged to take on the Herculean task of taming this flailing economy, but he is not doing it alone. Behind the scenes of Obamanomics is the president's economic team. For more on Obama's economic team, we have Nia Malika Henderson, White House reporter for Politico.com. Nia, welcome.
Guest: Hey there, Tony. It's good to be here.
Host: The stimulus plan, as we said, passed $789 billion to be infused into the economy, a lot of money that we are trusting to the government so it's best to get to know who is handling all of this cash. We have obviously heard the names of Treasury secretary Timothy Geithner, we've heard about the Recovery Advisory Board Chairman Paul Volcker, the National Economic Council Director Larry Summers. My question to you is besides the president, who is obviously a key player here, is there a singular key player overseeing this stimulus money or is it the team as a whole?
Guest: Well, it looks like it's the team as a whole. That very question was directed to Larry Summers a couple of days ago, you know, essentially who is the top guy, a reporter asked Larry Summers, and he said, Obama is the top guy, but of course there is this team of really kind of who's who in the economics world. Of course you have Larry Summers, who is the chair of the National Economic Council and then Tim Geithner, who hasn't had a very good roll-out over these next days as we saw, you know, some of his announcements have been met with real kind of plummeting stock market. I think the S&P dropped something like five percent when he kind of rolled out what many people thought wasn't a very well thought out plan for distributing the second half of the TARP money, about $350 billion. And then in Paul Volckner, everyone says of him that he, you know, he's definitely kind of a legend in the economic world, and he was very instrumental in the 1970s in kind of breaking the back of inflation and really kind of tamping down on the recession.
Host: Talk about Tim Geithner for a moment. How different is he, if he is at all different from the last Treasury secretary, Hank Paulson?
Guest: Well, Geithner is actually a protege of Robert Rubin and he was very instrumental, and he was just the chair of the New York Fed. And there he was very instrumental in rescuing some of those banks like Bear Stearns and very instrumental in giving AIG some of those rescue funds as well. He made the decision for instance to not rescue Lehman, so people thought when, you know, when he was first announced, the markets actually rallied and remember everybody said that his nomination even though he had these tax problems, it was too big to fail. So he is the guy that everybody is going to to really kind of understand the bailout of the financial industry. They're talking about, you know, moneys of upwards of $2 trillion in terms of stabilizing these markets in getting credit flowing again. But for now, the focus is on this $350 billion which is the second half of the TARP money. And so he is, you know, kind of trying to figure out how much of this money, I think, it's something like $50 to $100 billion dollars, is going to be for home - home foreclosures and kind of stabilizing that whole, you know, kind of decline there. So he's definitely the smartest guy in the room, but again, so is Larry Summers and so is Paul Volcker. So there are a lot of questions around how well they're going to be able to work together.
Host: One of the people that candidate Barack Obama used to build his financial credibility with the voting public was a person who was not in office of any kind, and that's Warren Buffett. And I'm wondering what role he or any other non-governmental advisers are playing, as far as this economic plan is concerned.
Guest: Right. You're right. He - during the campaign, Obama did talk about Warren Buffett and that was one of the things that - one of the few things that he and John McCain actually agreed on. He had kind of floated his name as a possible Treasury secretary. And I think there is a kind of group, a kind of unofficial advisers that he has. One of which is probably Warren Buffett, and also even Bill Gates in the days leading up to the inauguration. Bill Gates was in town and he essentially said, you know, we got to spend more money to get out of this fix. And he was also kind of meeting with transition folks about some of his pet projects. So there is kind of another group in addition to Geithner and Summers, and they're of course based in the White House and they have an agency to kind of oversee, and Volcker who's kind of an outsider and kind of looking at how these policies really kind of effect, you know, kind of Main Street and regular working Americans. And then there is kind of a third group of unofficial advisers, and Buffett is probably certainly one of those people who can call up Obama at any time and get him on the phone.
Host: Here is my final question, and only briefly, and it's this, we've listed several men on the economic team. Are there any women?
Guest: There are. Christina Romer, she is the director of the Council of Economic Advisers and then you also have Melody Barnes who is going to be looking at domestic policy, and then her deputy is a woman named Heather Higginbottom. So there are women, I mean, but certainly the top guys, the top people in the room are all men.
Host: The top guys are guys.
Guest: Yeah, exactly.
Host: All right. All right, Nia, thank you very much.
Guest: Thanks so much.
Host: That was Nia Malika Henderson, White House reporter for politico.com. She joined us from Politico's studios in Arlington, Virginia.