Host: One area where the economic downturn hit early and hit hard, office supply stores. Most of them cater to small businesses. Steve Odland is the CEO of Office Depot.
Guest: We started to see a slowdown in our business about a year ago, when the housing situation, especially in Florida and California, had an impact on our customers' liquidity. We found that these very small businesses were using their homes as sources of cash, either through home equity lines of credit or refinances, to take money out of their homes to finance their business. And when the housing prices began to decline, we saw that that liquidity dried up. Beginning in September, with the larger banking crisis, we began to see our largest customers, Fortune 500, banks, and so forth, experience the same kind of liquidity issues. And now, we know, of course, that has blown into a global banking and liquidity crisis. So everybody is sort of cutting back on office supplies, as well as other purchases during this period of time. But we're doing a lot of things to take care of our customers and to ensure our own security.
Host: Are you making any changes in inventory based on what you've been seeing?
Guest: Well, we have affected inventory. We've been able to successfully ramp down inventory, actually a little bit more aggressively even than our sales. So, we took 15 percent out of our inventory in the third quarter. But we're advantaged in that none of our inventory is fashion-related or perishable, and so it's just simply a matter of gearing the amount that we have to the demand that we have at any certain point in time.
Host: Times are tough, and it doesn't seem like there's going to be a big change any time soon. And companies might be, you know, clamping down even more so on their spending. What's it like to be a CEO in the midst of all of this?
Guest: I think this era is really unprecedented for most of us in business. And leadership is required in the best of times, and it's especially required in the toughest of times. We've got a little crisis of confidence in the economy right now. And I think people need to share with the broader population and their employee population what's going on and bring some context to it. What we're doing for our own employees at Office Depot is having town hall meetings to talk about the situation and to share with them what we're facing with our customers and how these are difficult times for our customers and that we really need to rally for our customers. So, I think communication is the best thing we can do right now in bringing context to this really unusual economic environment.
Host: Steve Odland is the CEO of Office Depot. Thanks for joining us.
Guest: Thank you, Alex.