Host: All black people don't eat alike of course, but at plenty of tables at family gatherings, you'll find corn bread, collared greens and fried chicken - some of the staples of soul food. In a new book, author and Marist College professor Frederick Douglass Opie delves into the history books to find the true soul of the food of the South, plus its place in the politics of black America. The book is called "Hog and Hominy: Soul Food from Africa to America." Fred, welcome to News & Notes.
Guest: Thank you.
Host: So why did you decide to look at the origins of food?
Guest: Well, the book started in 2000. I had an opportunity to participate in a health seminar. It was directed towards African-American without a church in metro D.C., and there was a medical doctor conducting the seminar and I ask him if I could participate by doing a project on the origins of soul food being the distinctive food that most African-Americans associate with holidays and special occasions.
Host: You mentioned in your book that some other authors believed that West African food was unmodified by European influences but you happened to disagree with that. So, what do you believe?
Guest: Yeah. What I found interesting is that before Africans came over to the Americas, as early as 1492 when the Portuguese where setting up forts on the coast of West Africa and Central Africa, that they were bringing over foods and food staples from the Americas, things like corn, cassava, and also the Indonesian traders were bringing over to Africa things like plantains. And these were new crops to Africa that the Africans then incorporated into their normal food staples. I have examples of Africans making corn bread in places like, you know, Mozambique, before they came over to the Americas. And we all know how important now corn bread is to African-American cuisines. So there were examples like that.
Host: You go through the evolution of soul food from many different perspectives and how it was not always - what we think of soul food - was not always a daily food. It was - sometimes the meat especially was a special food. Talk about how people ate what we think of as soul food in perhaps a different way than we do now.
Guest: Again, if we start in 16th century Africa, that you see Africans are consuming a large amounts of meat on special occasions. Meat, it tends to be used to season soups, stews, and things like that. And when the African comes to the Americas, you see generally the same thing. Slave rations didn't allow for the gorging of meat. You got the poor cuts of meat - salt, pork, and things like that, but you would not have a large amounts of meat unless you have a special occasion, like for example Christmas, New Years, after 1776, July fourth.
Host: I'm assuming that a lot of these things that might have been special or once in awhile became more common and readily available.
Guest: Exactly. What you see is when soul food restaurants emerged really around 1968 in association with black power, soul food or Southern food becomes marketed under the term soul food and what you see appear on the menu where things that during the antebellum period were special foods or even after the end of the antebellum period. You know, so at the turn of the century, you would see African-Americans eating special - what I call special occasion food like fried chicken - on Sunday only. So those are the type of dishes that would show up on the menu. Biscuits that I point out. Monday through Saturday was corn bread in most Southern homes. Sunday would be biscuits. And so biscuits are the things that in addition there's the corn bread that would show up on these menus. So, again, you saw people taking special foods and then trying to market them on a menu and become kind of regular consumption foods through restaurants.
Host: Soul food could even be controversial, even political. How were some of the debates over soul food in the 1960s and 1970s framed?
Guest: That's - to me the most interesting part of the book is the last chapter called 'Food Rebels.' And you look at people like Elijah Muhammad and the nation of Islam, and you look at activists like Dick Gregory who were essentially saying that, you know, one thing is to celebrate black culture, African culture, which were - many activists were doing. They'll celebrate all things African and black. And they were saying you can't celebrate something that has been in many ways altered change for the negative through the slavery experience. So, if you're telling black people, you know, to be revolutionary Dick Gregory would say there's nothing revolutionary about, you know, giving people food that's not healthy for them. He would also say that you can't talk about white people and white people destroying and killing black people, if you're going to tell them to eat a food that's actually committing genocide on our own community. That's one of his points - that this food is killing us as a people. And therefore, we should not be embracing it. We should embrace those things that are African and quote "black" but not - that are not harmful to us as a community.
Host: All right. Finally, where is the debate over soul food now in terms of whether or not it is good for black folks, killing black folks, you know, high cuisine, low cuisine?
Guest: Well, it's interesting. I interviewed a medical specialist, Doctor Elijah Saunders in Baltimore, University of Maryland Medical Center. And what he says is that, you know, soul food is so closely aligned and in the fabric of black people in their culture. That as a medical doctor he founded that it's almost impossible to get them to stop eating it. But what he suggested his patients is that they only eat on special occasions or modify it. So there's been a lot of new cookbooks that have come out in the last say, 15, 20 years where you're creating soul food diets for diabetes, soul food diet for people with, you know, all kinds of medical ailments. And so soul food has been modified, it's been changed. So people are not leaving soul food, people are either eating less of it or eating it in a more healthier form.
Host: Well, Fred, great to talk to you. Thanks.
Guest: Thank you for having me.
Host: That was author Frederick Douglass Opie, he is the director of the African Diasprus Study Program at Marist College. His new book is called "Hog and Hominy: Soul Food From Africa to America." And he joined us from Georgia Public Broadcasting in Atlanta.