Host: From NPR News, this is News & Notes. I am Farai Chideya. An auto bailout failed in the Senate. Now the Bush administration says it might find money from other bailout funds to keep the car companies from collapsing. Joining us to talk about the latest is Jerome Vaughn. He's the news program director for WDET in Detroit, Michigan. Hi, Jerome.
Guest: Good to be with you.
Host: So, what happened with the bailout that was being negotiated - debated in the Senate?
Guest: Well, to answer that in a brief way, because it can take hours and hours and hours to sort of deconstruct it, the House passed a version of the bill a few days ago. The Senate dug its heels in. They really looked at it. Democrats, Republicans tried to come up with a deal but Senate Republicans from the South really dug their heels in and said this is not something that we want to pass. Rep - excuse me - Senator Corker from Kentucky had a plan which would have required the United Auto Workers Union to dramatically cut wages, and the deal just fell apart throughout the evening. So, this morning many people in Detroit woke up and heard the news, and they've just been crushed so far today.
Host: So, have financial markets - and it seems as if there's been a circle on this issue where a lot of people were skeptical at first, obviously, the Senate defeat of the - you know, the moving forward of this bailout says that people - some people are still skeptical, but I think that over time it seems that people who are in financial markets have become more invested in the success of U.S. automakers. Do you feel that that's the case?
Guest: I do. I think that the longer this goes on and the more conversation there is about it, people realize how well-connected they are, that most people with 401ks in the United States probably have a share of one or the other automaker's stock, you know, GM being such a big part of the Dow 500. So, you know, people are starting to have an understanding of that. It's not gone far enough yet. Many people outside of the Midwest don't have that understanding of the importance of the auto industry to the country in the way that people are obviously connected to it in Michigan and Ohio and other Midwest states have an understanding of the issue.
Host: What do you make of the White House saying that it might use other funds, including what are being called the TARP funds, the bailout funds, to try to work with automakers?
Guest: Well, I think the White House has an understanding of how dire the situation is that these automakers - you know, GM, Chrysler say they need this $14 billion to get through the end of the year. I mean, this is not a package that, you know, they can kind of put off for a long period of time. This is money they need right away. I think the White House is receptive to that, and I would guess that the White House is also saying, you know, we don't want one or more of the automakers to fail on our watch, especially when, you know, we've only got, you know, a month and a few days left to go until the next administration. Let's get them that far, and then the Obama administration can figure out what to do with it in a more long-term way.
Host: Finally, what are the United Auto Workers doing to try to move things along and negotiate?
Guest: Well, President Ron Gettelfinger had a great news conference this morning, a rarity for him, and he really took the Republican senators for - to task for their reluctance to help out. Gettelfinger said, you know, he had made offers for concessions and willing to work to get the deal done. And he said it was clearly politics involved that that was the only reason the Republican senators from the South weren't willing to back this bill.
Host: Well, Jerome, thanks for the update.
Guest: My pleasure.
Host: Jerome Vaughn is the news program director for WDET in Detroit, Michigan, and he joined us from their studios.