Host: This is Day to Day. I'm Alex Cohen. Major defense companies aren't just sending planes and satellites and armored vehicles to troubled spots around the world, they're also sending people. This use of so-called "soft power" could mean big business like Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman. August Cole covers the defense industry for the Wall Street Journal. When we spoke earlier he told me the term "soft power" was coined by Harvard professor, Joseph Nye.
Guest: Well, soft power is getting what you want through your powers of attraction. For the military and for the civilian parts of the U.S. government that has meant turning to companies to provide, anthropologists for example in Iraq, in Afghanistan, to advise U.S. forces. It's meant using contracting out to peacekeeper trainers to send to Africa to help professionalize some of the forces over there to take on tasks like Darfur. So, when you look at the interest in these types of programs it's a huge departure from the traditional hardware businesses, but clearly a sign that these companies are looking towards this sort of work well into the future.
Host: And why make this investment now in people as opposed to things?
Guest: Well, the policy priorities that we've seen at the end of the Bush administration, the Obama administration now, clearly require a level engagement that the government can't quite match with its own people. Downsizing during the '90s and even during the ramp up of the last, let's say, seven or eight years, hasn't provided yet enough civilians to go forth and essentially act like a more muscular or robust form of the Peace Corps. And that as in many cases what you're going to be seeing in place such as West Africa, places like East Africa, companies that are doing again, work that is not necessarily to do with anything military but much more about global health or poverty alleviation, democracy promotion.
Host: And how much potential business is there in this soft power for this big defense companies?
Guest: I think one of the clearest signals came from the Obama administration's budget. There was a pledge to double foreign aid spending to $50 billion essentially in the first term. And that is just the kind of funding that would flow to the State Department of the U.S. Agency for International Development and is of course being eyed by these companies.
Host: How effective is this approach using soft power?
Guest: Well, that's a great question, and how is it carried out, of course, will be the key to whether these companies make money, was the government gets what it wants and nobody has any sort of problems with carrying out these programs. I think one of the biggest things to keep in mind is how difficult this work can actually be. Finding the right people is a critical component, whether you're doing security work in Iraq or sending folks out to do health-care work, say in South Sudan. This is not always easy to find the most qualified, most skilled people because there is a limited number and a lot of competition for them.
Host: What are the potential dangers of sending people to these areas of the world who may not have official military or defense training?
Guest: I would think one of the biggest potential liabilities is that our powers of attraction simply don't work because we haven't come across as sincere or we haven't come across as effective. That's not to say that because you send a contractor you can't be successful, that's not at all what I mean. Simply put, though that the delicate aspect of soft power requires a lot of finesse, and it's going to be up to the government and these companies at the same time to make sure they both can pull that off.
Host: The foreign service is sending over diplomats, you have these different individual companies sending over people as well, do you see any difference in terms of the types of civilians that these different parties are sending to places like Afghanistan?
Guest: Well, I think the first thing to think about is how quickly can the government send people it wants to some of these hot spots? One of the big challenges of say, creating a foreign service officer in qualifying and training them, it takes quite a long time. A contractor who may have had experience in the military or in economic development can be sent recently quickly. So, there's a gap if you will that has to be filled in the interim here, particularly as the Obama administration tries to engage in more and more places around the world. I think that's something that these companies will be focused on.
Host: Unemployment levels are at a new high. Do you have any sense that the quality of applicants for these jobs will increase with more and more people looking for work?
Guest: I would Imagine that people who have the kind of skills that are directly applicable to this kind of work or probably been doing it for a while and will continue to do so, I think it will be difficult in many cases for people, fresh off the street if you will, if you'd left an investment banking job. That said, I think there is going to be a lot of growth in this area and these companies will be hiring and then once people get through the kind of made of clearances and qualifications, if they do have say, a certain language skill or another, you know, scientific or engineering background, there probably will be opportunities out there in this area.
Host: August Cole writes about the defense industry for the Wall Street Journal. Thank you.
Guest: Thank you.
Host: More coming up on Day to Day from NPR News.