Host: Slavery in America is a well-documented era in our country. But what are the stories of the children of the slaves? What is this generation's legacy? Newsweek's special correspondent Sana Butler sought to find and to document their stories in her book, "Sugar of the Crop: My Journey to Find the Children of the Slaves." I began by asking her about her great-grandmother's funeral and how that started her on her journey.
Guest: I thought my family was the exception to the rule. When you talk about the years following slavery, you think of hostility and anger based on the people's experience. And my family raised us with love, and I thought that was not the traditional route with a lot of the histories, again, coming out of slavery. And when I started finding the people, I found that it was absolutely amazing that what I found was that the people I interviewed were not unlike my family in that what the people - raised their children with the same kind of unconditional love.
Host: Now, I would imagine that most of these interviews took place in the South, and that most of these people were either octogenarians or something older at the time that you talked to them, were they?
Guest: Let's try centenarians.
Host: Centenarians.
Guest: Centenarians. The oldest person I interviewed was 112 and I think the youngest was 86, a man named Christopher Sadox Wright(ph) in California. The 112-year-old, I was not able to include because she did not have all of her faculties. She didn't remember much about her family or her years as - you know, she didn't really remember much about yesterday.
Host: Yeah. Let me ask, I would think, Sana, that - you've already mentioned that you were surprised that a number of these people were not angry or did not harbor bitterness about having been born to parents who were slaves. But what else was it about them, if there was a thread that seemed to tie them together?
Guest: Their parents raised them with hope, the idea that I want your life to be better than mine. And though things aren't the way we were promised, right, with emancipation. Things aren't the way they were promised, that one day they will be, and you'll be ready for it.
Host: You also described them in the book as having immigrant-like expectations. Explain what you meant.
Guest: There was this genuine commitment to want to believe in the future, which is phenomenal to think about. There was this belief that everything that happened to me is over. The worst is behind after the Civil War, and I am going to go out and seek a new life in freedom, right? So everything, all of my hopes and dreams, I am going to give that back to the country. There was a genuine commitment to reinvest in the building of what was to be a new America.
Host: Was it a patriotism?
Guest: It was. They truly believe that they were Americans and they wanted to participate. There was a social and political momentum in the years following the Civil War that has yet to be matched in the level which freed slaves voted, ran for office, were elected into office. Those rates have never since been seen.
Host: Who stood for you and what was about their story that touched you?
Guest: Gosh, I felt all the stories touched me, really. And I know it sounds generic and cliche, but there were epiphany moments in every single interview and - but I do think the one that stood out the most was - you know, it was Mr. Hood. He was my very, very last interview. I - and from him, I got the name of the chapter. But more importantly, he'd stopped talking two days after I left and died three days later, and there was this need to want to tell his story, to want to tell the story of his family and the story of his family's father - once a slave, born in South Carolina, and was auctioned away along with his brothers and sisters. But they all made a pact to get back together after the war ended. And it just - and a lot of them risked their lives and, you know, the story of African-Americans coming out of slavery is such that slavery is the root cause of the breakdown of the African-American families. And that's - you know, historians and scholars say that. But to hear Mr. Hood tell it, it's a completely different angle.
Host: Now, you mentioned "Sugar of the Crop," which is the title of the book, and I believe that's the one that came from Mr. Hood, isn't it?
Guest: Mm hmm, yeah.
Host: Tell our audience what that meant because I thought that was really fascinating.
Guest: Oh, it brings tears to my eyes just to think about it. Mr. Hood said that he - Mr. Hood had three sons and one daughter. His father was, again, a slave born in South Carolina named Reverend John(ph). And his father - Mr. Hood's father, Reverend John, used to call the only granddaughter he had Sugar. And when I asked Mr. Hood what sugar meant, he said my father called her sugar because she was the sweetest out of the whole family. So he called her Sugar of the Crop, and that's what this generation was - the first free generation of African-Americans raised by freed slaves. It's the sweetest out of the community of African-Americans. That's who we are.
Host: Sana, thank you.
Guest: My pleasure, Tony.
Host: That was Sana Butler. She is a special correspondent at Newsweek International. Her book is "Sugar of the Crop: My Journey to Find the Children of the Slaves." She joined us from the NPR studios in New York. That's our show for today. Glad you could join us. To listen to the show or subscribe to the podcast, visit our Web site, nprnewsandnotes.org. To join the conversation or sign up for the newsletter, visit our blog at nprnewsandviews.org. News and News was created by NPR News and the African-American Public Radio Consortium. Tomorrow, an update on a story we brought you earlier. Timothy Cole died in prison while serving time for a crime he did not commit. Now, a Texas court has reversed his conviction. We talked to the family of Timothy Cole about his posthumous exoneration. I'm Tony Cox. This is News and Notes.