Host: Hil St. Soul is pretty popular with R&B fans in the United Kingdom, but the duo hasn't gotten a lot of attention in the United States, at least not yet. Vocalist Hilary Mwelwa was born in Zambia, but moved to the U.K. as a child. She and her musical partner, Victor Redwood Sawyerr just released their third album of R&B and soul. It's called "Black Rose." Recently Hilary sat down to tell us about growing up in London, and how that shaped her life, and her music. Plus what lies ahead.
Guest: Growing up in the U.K., I remember it was really a mixture of like, just generally pop music. Because unlike in the U.S., the charts over here is kind of a mish mash of everything really. So you kind of would hear someone like Luther Vandross, the Eurythmics, or, you know, Blondie. So it was definitely a variety of music that, you know, I was exposed to.
Host: When you think about the sound that you have, I mean, there's a sound sometimes you hear with British Soul, whether it's black artists, white artists, whatever, there's a certain approach to contemporary and even avant-garde soul, that I think you hear a lot more with British artists then American artists. Do you perceive a difference between kind of soul coming out of the U.K. and soul coming out of the U.S.?
Guest: Yeah, I think there is actually. I mean, maybe not so much now, but I do feel, you know, kind of the more - the artists from a little, you know, a little bit way back when, like, you know, Lou Sins (ph) and Soul to Soul(ph) definitely had a definitive sound that you didn't really hear coming out the, you know, U.S., and that's what kind of what made it very British. But I do feel like a lot of the up and coming British artists now, they - because we tend to look to, you know, the U.S. for soul and R&B, and a lot of them do - I guess they try to kind of mimic what's going on over there. So it's not as defined by - you know, my kind of influences were people like, you know, the Lou Sins and the what have you, from over here. So I do feel that, yeah, probably I'm kind of more in tune with, you know, what they would do, and maybe that has kind of filtered into my music as well. (Singing) I've got a question When you open your eyes And you see the Sunrise Are you strengthened? 'Cause the tear in your eye Is like a sad song Or a sweet lullaby Like the birds in the sky Is it alright? Where has the love gone? Hold on. So I left my worries in the sand
Host: Let's talk through some of the songs on your album. You're working with Victor Redwood Sawyerr.
Guest: Yes.
Host: And how do you guys work? For example, on a song "Don't Forget the Ghetto." How did you guys combine your talents to make that song?
Guest: Well, on that particular song, I mean, the song was already written. The lyrics and the melody, you know, was already there. In that sort of situation, Victor will listen to what I'm singing, and how I'm singing it, and the he will kind of start vibing off that, and start kind of coloring the lyrics and the melody of the song, and put in his, kind of, creative input into it. So that's really how that song came about. It was very much his song, and, you know, the melody's already there, and then Victor just kind of did his thing around it.
Host: What's the song about?
Guest: Well "Don't Forget the Ghetto" is just really just talking about human beings in general. Whether it's just like, you know, your everyday person on the street, or politicians as well. You know, in a sense of, sometimes when we progress in life and are in a better situation than other people, we kind of tend to forget where we come from, and become detached from, you know, the kind of - your roots, as it were. So it's just kind of like a little sort of poking, having fun, poking at whoever, just saying, OK, fine, you're doing good in life, you're getting on, we're happy for you, but don't forget those that you left behind, or, you know, don't forget your roots and where you came from. (Singing) Wherever you go Don't forget the ghetto. Just to let you know Don't forget the ghetto (unintelligible) Don't forget the ghetto 'Cause that's a no-no
Host: In another song, the title track "Black Rose," you sing, "An English rose singing Soul music gets praised for it. A black rose singing soul music gets no love for it." Some people say that this is a reference to the success of Amy Winehouse. First of all, is that true? And secondly, what is the reference?
Guest: The reference is - yeah, it is actually talking about the state of the, you know, the U.K. music industries. It's not directly at Amy Winehouse, but it's just using artists like her as an example. Because I actually think that, you know, apart from, obviously she's got a lot of personal issues, but as an artist she's very talented, and therefore, deserves to be - you know, have that platform, you know, showcasing her talent. But what I tend to find over here is that more attention is paid to artists like Amy and, you know, we've got a lot more now, actually because of Amy getting signed, and you know, getting out there. People like Odelle (ph), Duffy (ph), you know, so there's like a long list of artists of that type getting the machinery behind them, getting signed, you know, getting the props. Black female artists in the U.K. don't really get the same recognition, and that's what that song's really talking about. It's not me - it's nothing to do - saying they, you know, they shouldn't be allowed to sing. And if they want to do soul music, I think it's great because, you know, music is universal, it's meant for everybody. So I really don't have a problem with that. What I have a problem with is, you know, just a lot more attention is paid to artists like that, as apposed to, you know, myself, because there's - you know, I could name loads of them over here that should be out - you know, should be getting the same kind of praise, and don't. I'm just baffled at that.
Host: Now, you do get your props. Vibe Magazine said that your rich, velvety voice warms the inside like a spot of tea. Do you generally try to read the reviews, or...
Guest: I do actually.
Host: You do?
Guest: Yeah, I think it's good. You know, I think it's a good thing. I mean, obviously you're not always going to hear what you want to hear, but you know, it's all part and parcel of growing up and you just kind of like taking things on board. Whether you, you know - it's really down to you whether you want to take a lot of what they say on board. But I actually enjoy reading it, and I don't expect every review to be glowing or anything like that. But I think it's important to kind of know what people feel, and think about your music out there. (Singing) In your eyes you'll always be the greatest Something to celebrate it
Host: This is a little bit of a digression, but there are so many people who are African-Brits, or African-Americans, in the sense of having immigrated from Africa, or having parents who did. And I think that there's a moment in time, in the U.S. in part, because you have a Barack Obama, where people are saying, Oh, well yeah, there's all these different flavors of blackness. How does that play into your work at all?
Guest: I don't really - I don't think I'm effected by that, as such, because I kind of am originally I - you know, I was born in Zambia, so I'm African first and foremost.
Host: But you came over so young.
Guest: Yeah. I came over when I was really young. So obviously, you know, growing up in the British environment, I've absorbed a lot of their culture. You know, because it's just a natural thing. You kind of - you hang out with, you know, the local, you know, people from the U.K. or whatever. So naturally you're going to pick up a lot of their habits and their ways, but you know, first and foremost, I always see myself as, you know, African. And I know - well my parents never let me forget that anyway, you know, because we do - we had all the kind of culture, and just general kind of grounding, you know, installed in us at a very young age. So I've always kind of carried that with me anyway as I've progressed in life. But I always look at it as, you know, an advantage really, because I've had the privilege of experiencing, you know, my African culture in life, and, you know, I've had the opportunity of experiencing being British, and, you know, growing up in the U.K. And now I'm, you know, experiencing kind of some of the flavors of the U.S. So I always look at it like, you know, it's a positive thing.
Host: All right, Hilary, thanks so much.
Guest: Oh, thank you.
Host: That was Hilary Mwelwa, of Hil St. Soul. The duo recently released an album called "Black Rose"