Host: Tomorrow, car sales numbers for November are due out, and they're not expected to be good. That could lead to more dealerships shutting down, and that could mean a big loss of revenue for local governments. For example, this year, the state of California has lost at least two billion dollars in sales taxes due to the drop in car sales. To get a better sense of how local governments are coping, we're joined now by Marshall Bond. He is the city manager for Monroeville, Pennsylvania. Thanks for joining us, and why don't you tell us how many car dealerships are in Monroeville?
Guest: Just about every major domestic and foreign manufacturer sells cars here in Monroeville.
Host: And so, how much of your budget comes from the revenue from car sales at these dealerships?
Guest: We have a business tax which obviously is, I'd say, probably of that - I'd say total tax is probably about 15 to 20 percent is based upon our related car industry.
Host: So, it's a fair chunk of change.
Guest: It is, yeah.
Host: How are the dealerships there faring? How are their sales going?
Guest: It's a little hard to tell because, of course, our figures are based on last year's activity. You know, while I don't think it's as bleak as other areas of the country, I don't see as much activity as I am sure that most of them would like to see. So, it's a little bit destitute, for lack of a better term, than we'd like to see.
Host: So, how are you going to deal with that? Are you going to need to make cuts to your budget?
Guest: Well, we're going to have to take a close look and see what the outfall is. I mean, we're like everybody else. I mean, government - even local government tends to lag a little bit behind business and some of the larger governments. But it will all filter down, and it's either going to be other types of taxes, which certainly elected officials don't like to impose, or it's going to be cuts, and if I had to bet, it would be the latter.
Host: And is there fat to trim in your budget?
Guest: That depends on who you talk to, of course. You know, some of our police and fire and public works folks have gone through some tough times so far, but we as a government, I think, have to reflect what's going on to the people we serve. And, you know, if they are having to do with a lot less and, you know, make some significant cuts in muscle as opposed to non-muscle, we're going to have to do the same ourselves.
Host: In addition to helping out local government, auto dealerships often fund local charities, sports teams, things like that. Have you seen any fallout there in Monroeville?
Guest: Not yet, but I know that it can only reflect what the economy is reflecting, and fortunately or unfortunately, some of those cuts are the easiest to make because they are somewhat discretionary, and, you know, so I just anticipate it only being a matter of time before, you know, those type charities, as you would, are impacted.
Host: Obviously, it's in your best interest to have these car dealerships fare well. So, is there anything that you as a city manager have been doing to try to help them out, to keep them open?
Guest: Well, actually, there is. I mean, our council has granted a sort of a 20 percent reduction for this year on business taxes, and, you know, we're having to tighten our belt a little bit to deal with that in the hope that, you know, that does relieve some of the stress that sort of demonstrates that, you know, we are doing our own little version of an economic stimulus package because it affects all retail sales in the community. But, you know, we're going to have to deal with getting less revenue at a time where that's going to be very, very difficult, but something that we felt we have to take a leadership role in. And we can't print money, but we can reduce.
Host: Marshall Bond is the city manager in Monroeville, Pennsylvania. Thank you and best of luck.
Guest: Thank you.