Host: President-elect Barack Obama has a conference scheduled for later today. He is expected announce a few more administration appointments, and he's also expected to get more questions about contacts with Illinois Governor Rob Blagojevich. NPR senior Washington editor Ron Elving is here now to tell us all about what's going to happen. First of all, let's talk about these appointments; this is for his so-called Green Team.
Guest: Yes. The Green Team at Energy and Environment and a couple of other posts as well. Steven Chu, who is the director of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, one of the world's leading research laboratories, has been named Energy secretary. This is a guy who won the Nobel Prize back in the 1990s, and he's going to expand the idea of what Energy does to include more alternative-energy research and upgrading the electricity grid to accommodate that. Over at the Environmental Protection Agency, we're going to see a new face, Lisa Jackson, who comes from New Jersey. Actually, she's originally from New Orleans, grew up in the Lower Ninth Ward. And she has been the head of the Environmental Protection Agency in New Jersey, and more recently, she's been the chief-of-staff for the governor there. And another familiar face from the Clinton days is coming back into the White House; this is Carol Browner. She's going to function as the White House coordinator for Energy and Environment issues, a kind of, if you will, green and energy czar within the White House. And then finally, another woman, Nancy Sutley, who has been the deputy mayor in Los Angeles, will be heading the White House Council on Environmental Quality.
Host: All right. And no mention of secretary of the Interior, which I assume would have an integral role in whatever environmental policies President-elect Obama wants to set up.
Guest: Yes. And I would think that they would want to have that coordination right from the beginning. The name that's emerged as kind of the leading candidate in the last 48 hours is Senator Ken Salazar, a Democrat from Colorado. And were he to take to this job, of course, he'd have to give up his seat in the Senate. That'd be yet one more vacancy in the Senate. And Ken Salazar is the kind of guy who has a bright political future ahead of him, maybe would like to be a governor someday. So, the question for him is does, he take this executive position and take on the very difficult Interior issues as they affect the West - and this is usually where the Interior secretary comes from, the Mountain West - and try to resolve some of the water issues and other environmental questions in concert with this new Green Team.
Host: Ron, at this news conference later today, the president-elect will get at least one question on Illinois Governor Rob Blagojevich. What's new there?
Guest: Probably, the question he will get will be, what involvement did your new chief-of-staff in the White House, Rahm Emanuel, have in any kind of negotiations that might have been going on between your office or your team and that of Rob Blagojevich? A man he has known for many, many years and actually replaced in Congress. That'll be one question that's raised. The other question, of course, is what do you think is going to happen with this guy, the governor? And the governor is playing for time. He's saying maybe he'll step down; maybe he won't. Maybe he would sign a bill that would set a special election to fill the Obama seat and take that appointment power away from himself. He's just trying to negotiate better terms for his future.
Host: NPR senior Washington editor Ron Elving. Thank you very much.
Guest: Thank you, Madeleine.
Host: Stay with us on Day to Day from NPR News.