Host: This recession is proving to be a boon for the nation's libraries. People are flocking to them to use their free computers for job searches, or simply to borrow books and movies. With me now is Linda Yoder. She's director of the Nappanee Public Library in northern Indiana, and she's been a librarian there since 1981. Welcome to program.
Guest: Thank you.
Host: Tell us, what do you see in your library?
Guest: We were just looking at statistics again this morning, and preliminary results are showing us a 56 percent increase from December of 2008 to December 2007.
Host: And - wow, 56 percent increase. So what does that translate into - long lines?
Guest: That means we are just seeing a phenomenal increase in the utilization of services here at the library, and that's circulating books, circulating DVDs, audio cassettes, all sorts of materials.
Host: And people on the computers?
Guest: Yes, definitely.
Host: And so, do people have to wait to get a turn at the computers?
Guest: Sometimes they do. We've just received word from the Department of Workforce Development that we may be receiving an additional 15 computers to help supplement what we're doing. We were doing a lot of free classes. We have a lot of great partnerships with educational organizations within the area, so we're able to do free GED classes, free basic computer classes.
Host: How many librarians do you have?
Guest: Total, we have 20 on staff. Quite a number of those are part time, so about eight that are full time.
Host: And is that enough to deal with this increase in demand?
Guest: It's a stretch, it really is. The one thing that we're finding that we're utilizing more to meet that challenge is the volunteers. We've got a lot of folks that have time on their hands while they're unemployed, and so we've been plugging them in where we can to help with - provide some of those basic services.
Host: So actually, the people coming to you for services, you're actually turning around and saying, we need you to help.
Guest: Exactly. You know, I was just talking to a library director the other day that said, you know, they even had somebody that was so grateful for the support that they were receiving with the unemployment issues that they've been showing up early every morning to shovel snow. So, it's sort of a bartering system that's going on.
Host: Ms. Yoder, not so long ago, a lot of people of wrote off public libraries as irrelevant in the Internet age. And I'm just wondering, in a perverse kind of way, is this a good thing for you?
Guest: Well, it definitely, I think, makes a point that in tough economic times, libraries become an essential part of people's lives, and we know that. You know, we work with people, even in the good times, who may be struggling to deal with some of these same issues. But I think the difference now is that the numbers have increased, and it becomes even more apparent that the role the libraries play, from one community to the next, is a very vital community resource center.
Host: Linda Yoder is director of the Nappanee Public Library in northern Indiana. Ms. Yoder, thank you very much.
Guest: Thank you.