Host: As Gulf Coast residents fled the path of Hurricane Gustav, the storm has changed plans for the Republican National Convention in Minnesota. It also changed the plans of Bishop Oliver Coleman. He is a delegate from New Orleans, and was supposed to attend the convention, but decided to stay close to the Gulf Coast. He joins us now from Jackson, Mississippi. Welcome to News & Notes.
Guest: Thank you. I'm just glad that I would be here with you today. I would have been happy to be in Minneapolis, but due to the fact that we had an emergency with the hurricane, we had to stay to assist with other duties here. But many of my other colleagues did go to Minneapolis.
Host: Was it a hard decision for you to decide whether to go or whether to stay?
Guest: Well, I waited until the last moment before I contacted the delegation chair to say that I wouldn't be making it. And they asked me at that point, was I clear? And I was pretty clear on it when I made the decision not to go.
Host: How important is it for you, Bishop, that your party be seen as involved in the relief process, and what's your reaction to the alteration of the convention's schedule as a result of the hurricane?
Guest: Well I think that it shows that the Republican Party is a caring party and that they will put people first. As the nominee says many times as I've talked to him, many times, and he said he wanted to put people first. So this certainly will show that when it comes to Senator McCain, that he would be caring about the people, because in New Orleans on a previous visit, he said never again would the response be like Katrina. So he had to make a decision, and I'm pretty happy with that decision.
Host: How concerned are you, if at all, about the fact that the changes will now mean that the president, the head of the party, George Bush, will not be attending the convention, not be giving an address as he was scheduled to tonight, nor will Dick Cheney?
Guest: Well, I'm, you know, I was kind of halting between two opinions about that, whether the president would be there. I don't think that that would change very much. Of course, if you noticed, the president has not been very, very involved in the campaign of Senator McCain so far as public appearances. So that - and of course, that cemented my decision not to go, because when the president and the vice president was going to go, you know - and I feel that I have an obligation to the citizens that I serve as a committee person to be back home. The whole team didn't need to go.
Host: Had the president and vice president gone, are you saying you would have gone then in that instance?
Guest: It would have been - in other words, the decision for me would have probably been harder for me to make the decision. But it was easy knowing that President Bush wasn't going to go.
Host: How many other evacuees are there in the Jackson area where you are, and what's been their - what's the sense that you have from them about getting out of, having to get out of New Orleans again, almost three years to the day?
Guest: Everybody was - here, it seems to be upbeat. Of course, everybody was - they're watching. As a matter of fact, there's a group of people down in the lobby watching the constant news media. But everybody seems to be happy. They were a little disturbed that we would have had to stay - we might have to stay as long as we have, but the people are pretty upbeat, and we have a approximately, I'd say 200 or so people in this hotel that is from the region, from Orleans Parish, from Eljez (ph), Louisiana, from LaPlace, you know, Saint John's Parish, various parishes in Louisiana. So they're here, and everybody seems to be upbeat, I think in general.
Host: Do you think you will have the opportunity if, weather permitting actually, to still make it to Minneapolis?
Guest: Well, you know, I have my option open for that, but I don't think that I will be going. But I did - between now and the closing of the convention, I still have my options open to do that. But I doubt seriously if it will. I will be speaking to other members of the delegation. But even some of the people that was there came back. So...
Host: Here's my final question, we have less than a minute for you to give us a brief answer, and it's this. You were obviously a Republican before the selection of Sarah Palin as the vice-presidential nominee. How do you feel about your party with her in the number two spot on the ticket?
Guest: Well, I - yeah. I personally - my - I didn't feel that that was probably the best pick, but I don't really know exactly why Senator McCain picked her. She wouldn't have been my - she wasn't on the radar for mine. I really thought that the governor of Minnesota would have gotten that call. Now, I knew that our governor of Louisiana got as much talk, I'm talking about Bobby Jindall, but it wouldn't have been the right timing for him to go in. I'm sure that he said no.
Host: Bishop Coleman, thank you very much for speaking with us.
Guest: You keep doing what you guys are doing. We appreciate you very much, OK?
Host: Thank you, sir. That was New Orleans resident, Bishop Oliver Coleman, speaking with us from Jackson, Mississippi.