Host: Will it close the digital divide? The Obama camp turns to the iPhone for a new get-out-the-vote strategy, and Google unveils a phone of its own to compete with the Apple handset. Well, here to keep us up to speed with the latest in technology news, is our regular contributor, Mario Armstrong. Hi, Mario.
Guest: Hi there. How are you?
Host: I'm quite well, hope you are, too.
Guest: Yes, doing good.
Host: OK. So imagine a city, an entire city, blanket it with this ultra high speed Internet connection. That's no longer a fantasy, and Baltimore City is beefing up its Internet connectivity next week with a new technology called WiMax. And Mario, as I understand, people have been calling this wi-fi on steroids.
Guest: That's a good way of putting it.
Host: So you tested it out. How different is this?
Guest: I have tested it out and it is quite different. I think a lot of people are using that comparison of wi-fi on steroids because it is - first and foremost, it is a wireless communication. It has the ability for us to be able to connect our laptops, mobile devices and other things through the Internet wirelessly. The main difference is wi-fi hot spots are typically limited in the amount of coverage area, usually up to 700-feet, around 300-feet or so. So that's why it's useful in places like airports or coffee shops but you really can't move, you have to stay - kind of fixed in that one location. WiMax on the other hand, one base station can really give you about 30 miles of range. So you have 300-feet from wi-fi compared to about 30 miles from WiMax.
Host: Wow.
Guest: And it claims to have faster speeds than wi-fi, which I can say, at this point in my testing, has proven to be true.
Host: So why is Sprint is launching it in Baltimore?
Guest: You know, that's kind of the weird question that we're getting in B-more town as we call it. You know, people in the West Coast say, I'm out at the valley...
Host: I'm jealous. Well, I know it's coming to Chicago but you know.
Guest: Right and...
Host: Why do we have to wait?
Guest: Because you guys aren't as cool as Baltimore.
Host: Well - we'll talk about that later. Go ahead.
Guest: No, I really think - I think this is good that this is actually being launched in Baltimore for a number of reasons, because you're asking the question and a lot of other people are - but the bottom line is when I talked to Sprint, Baltimore offers some unique urban characteristics about the city. And ultimately, it's a great test bed, it's not too large, it's not too small, has a good concentration of people within the city. It has the penetration of people, business professionals and others that would use this service. And it has all of the interference things that could cause problems and limitations, tall buildings, steel, just all the trees, just all the environments, things that you would expect in an urban environment. So if it could work here it should work to scale in other places.
Host: What else...
Guest: But I still say, it's because we're cooler, in tech than everybody else.
Host: Of course, you would. Well, Senator Obama's campaign - the battle for swing votes to the iPhone this week with the new application called, "Call Friends". So how does this application work?
Guest: Yeah, this is amazing that if - his team is like on top of this. So, yeah, 'Call Friends,' basically you have an iPhone and you go to the iPhone store through iTunes. Download the application and essentially it's a tool that's kind of designed to help you get more involved not only with the campaign but it's directed really at - all the people that are in those swings states. Which is what I think is very interesting because it helps you organize by contacts in the swing states, and that's what the whole 'Call Friends' is about. So it's kind of like six degrees of separation that they're trying to reduce to help you "Call Friends" that you may know or maybe network to in some of the swing states. Maybe give a little bit more influence or a little bit more impact to the political process.
Host: Well, the Obama campaign, of course, has got a lot of attention for its use of technology. And I was wondering, if you expect the McCain campaign to rule out anything similar.
Guest: You know, I don't know, it would be nice to see that quite frankly. I think both of these campaigns need to continue to show this type of outreach of utilizing technology. And McCain has launched a new social network as of a few weeks ago called 'McCain Space' and it is a much better looking social network than what they had before. So, it's a good point that you're raising. They might see this as something that's maybe a waste of time but, you know, they got this application created in three weeks. And normally, iPhone developers need way longer than three weeks, so that's pretty impressive. So it's feasible that the McCain campaign could turn around and have an application themselves.
Host: Well you talked about social networking, so I want to talk just a little about that, Facebook of course has around a 100 million users, MySpace has even more, there's Flicker, there's Twitter, there's all of these things. National Public Radio's got in to the Web 2.0 World with its launch of an online community. So we're right there with you, New York Times, has it - one as well. So how are all of these social networks, how do they enrich reader or listeners experience.
Guest: Yeah, well at the core. They do what they're supposed to do. They're supposed to give voice to the fans, to the members, or to the listeners, or the people that belong to a membership, or an organization, or a company. I mean, you have - it's turning over the control, if you will, of allowing conversations of people that have likeminded interest, to be able to make new connections and share their point - opinions and viewpoints. And at the core, if it does that, then it has a success of having a non-biased, non-agenda type of social platform that really can grow. And I believe, you know, not just being on NPR, not trying to sound overly biased here, that there is a community of loyal listeners to NPR programming. And this could be a platform that allows them to be able to voice their opinions, and maybe not always agree with things that happened on NPR, but I think that always builds a better NPR as well, so I think it's smart move.
Host: OK. Well, guess we're doing well.
Guest: I just joined it today. I just signed up and the sign up process was easy. I just uploaded my little profile. So people that are listening you know, the hit me up at NPR's social network, I'm on their as Digital Dude Mario.
Host: OK. Well, I want jump back to the mobile phone news because
Guest: OK.
Host: Internet search giant Google has jumped into the phone game. They've unveiled their new smart phone called the G1, and that's supposed to be available on stores later this month. So are we just seeing a big leap here in cell phone capability?
Guest: Yeah, it's not - you know, it's funny they came up with the G1. It's like - is that a plane or what exactly will this phone - will it fly?
Host: It means that G2 will be coming your way.
Guest: Right. So, yeah, this an interesting play on Google. They launched with about 34 other member organizations. They created this thing called the Open Handset Alliance, and what that did was create - started this whole thing of creating a mobile software, and they're calling it 'Android.' So by creating software, they then said, you know, we need mobile devices that could run this software. And that's how we get to T-mobile and HTC developing this phone called the G1. So it comes out later this month, and it's really being pitched against the iPhone. It's going to see, it's going - really be interesting to see how this battle between the iPhone, who's done very well for itself, versus this new comer of the G1 - T-mobile, how they go head to head in the next few weeks.
Host: You think they're going to be able to edge the amount?
Guest: I think they will. I don't know about edging amount but I certainly know that the market needs more competition and it needs more ideas. And if Google's behind it, and they keep it open source, that would be really good for - I mean - it is open source, that would be really good for application providers and developers to create more things. But you know, iPhone has already been out for a little while, so they have a jump start. But we need competition because not everybody can get an iPhone because they don't want to be on AT&T.
Host: Yeah.
Guest: So I think this is definitely a good option and something that people will definitely get in line for.
Host: Well, Mario, we could go on for days and days. There is just so much.
Guest: You mean we're almost done?
Host: We're almost done. There's so much new stuff out there that I just can't - you know...
Guest: Another hour for News & Notes. We need another hour for News & Notes. I'm going to start - there you go, I go to the social network and I'll start a community, a new group, 'Another hour for news and notes.'
Host: Thank you, Mario. Well, thank you, Mario. Mario Armstrong is News & Notes regular technology contributor and he joined us from the studios of the Baltimore Sun.