Host: Roxanne, let's shift gears now. I mean, we have had an opportunity to really talk about African immigrants and some of the political issues about Africa vis-a-vis this new incoming administration. But there are a lot of issues that are ongoing. The kinds of things that we talk about each week,, and right now there is fighting in the Congo. Can you give us a little update on that?
Guest: I certainly can. The situation in the Congo, which is actually something that has been going on literally for the last on-and-off 14 years, that we thought there was some secession of violence in 2006 with the U.N. peace keeping force, MONUC, being there, and actually the Congolese people rallying together to have a free and fair election, or at least to try to have a free and fair election. But now it seems that despite the January conference, the Goma conference that happened between the Congolese government and the 22 armed groups, rebel groups with different political interests in the country. Despite that resolution - that coming together and the agreements that were made there, that the peace that's in the Congo, that fragile peace has been broken. Last month - at the end of last month, one of the political parties in the Congo - political parties and slash military forces - the CNDP, which is led by a gentleman named Nkunda, began to basically have open warfare in the Congo, fighting with Congolese troops and displacing mass numbers of Congolese people. In that time, in the last couple of weeks, U.N. and international aid workers have been unable to do their jobs, 100,000 people have been displaced, adding to the numbers of already about 100,000 people that were already displaced with the ongoing conflict. And the situation in the Congo is dire.
Host: What role has the U.S. played in trying to deal with the humanitarian issues in the Congo, and what role do you see ahead, you know, in the waning period of time that we have with the Bush administration? And then, of course this is somewhat speculative, with an Obama administration?
Guest: Well, the U.S. has actually not played a very active, out front political role. They've ceded their kind of power to the European Union, and mostly we've been involved through our international business interests in the Congo. We have been a strong ally to Rwanda, and Rwanda some people believe, is fueling the ongoing conflict that's happening in the Congo by backing Nkunda, who've they've backed since the very beginning when he joined with other forces to put Mubutu out of power. And so the U.S. has actually been a fair-weather friend to the Congolese people. What we hope going for is that the U.S. will redouble its efforts in support of MONUC, which is severely under-funded and under-resourced, that there'll be more international troops that are there and not just European troops, or troops from the United States, but troops from all over the world who are French-speaking, who can work with the Congolese people to help restore peace. We also hope that the U.S. will actually change its investment packages toward the Congo. Right now, we've been mostly focusing our work in parts of the Congo that are fairly stable. In west Congo and southern Congo, and not in the eastern Congo where most of the violence is happening. And that has helped us spur some development, but also has not actually dealt with the big problems in the Congo. Which are problems that can easily spill out, out of the reagion of eastern Congo to the rest of Congo, and throughout the rest of southern and central Africa, to be fair.