Host: This is Day to Day. I'm Madeleine Brand. A new Italian movie opens this week in U.S. theaters. This is no "La Dolce Vita." It's called "Gomorrah." The title is a play on words, combining a biblical city famous for lawlessness and the Italian Camorra, the organized crime ring that controls the region around Naples, Italy. NPR's Sylvia Poggioli reports.
Guest: (Soundbite of movie "Gomorrah") (Soundbite of movie "Gomorrah") The movie is based on the best-selling book of investigative reporting by journalist Roberto Saviano, who co-wrote the movie's screenplay.
Host: (Through Translator) In the world of "Gomorrah," death is an absolute ordinary occurrence. A Camorrista kills before being killed.
Guest: Besides drug dealing and protection rackets, one of the Camorra's specialties is illegal disposal of toxic waste in the Neapolitan countryside. The Camorra is said to be responsible for 4,000 murders in the last 30 years. Its home turf is Naples and its surrounding bad lands.
Host: I couldn't image to fund a territorial war in 2008 in Italy.
Guest: Director Matteo Garrone worked on location for nearly a year.
Host: It's a sort of a jungle. People fight for survive. But most of the people that I met, they are not aware about their condition. It's like a ecosystem. It's like something that is close. They don't know about something that is outside of that reality.
Guest: "Gomorrah" won the grand prize at the Cannes Film Festival last year. Film critic Irene Bignardi says it harks back to the heyday of Italian postwar cinema.
Host: It is a kind of updated neo-realism, made with people taken from the streets, with people who became actors by chance, in a way, who were living part of their own experience on the screen.
Guest: (Soundbite of movie "Gomorrah") (Soundbite of movie "Gomorrah") (Soundbite of movie "Gomorrah") Tony Servillo plays a smiling Franco, who like a ringmaster, directs the baby truck drivers as they descend into a modern version of Dante's circles of Hell. Author Roberto Saviano has no illusions that the book or the movie will help undermine the Camorra's grip on society.
Host: (Through Translator) But I hope this movie will finally show people the ferocious face of Italy, which is a face that really runs things. I think many American moviegoers will be surprised by this face of Italy.
Guest: The Camorra's growing power has devastated the Naples regions physical and moral landscape. It has perhaps Europe's highest rates of murder and drug consumption. And thanks to toxic dumped onto farm land, it also produces Italy's highest cancer rates. American filmmaker Martin Scorsese strongly endorses "Gomorrah," calling it despairing but also enlightening, and because of its frankness, strangely heartening. Sylvia Poggioli, NPR News, Rome.