Host: From NPR News, this is Day to Day. Everyone knows Santa Claus delivers presents via the chimney. What if you don't have a chimney? Writer Mike Adamick ponders that existential question.
Guest: My two-year-old daughter crammed herself into our fireplace, twisting her body to look upward. After a close inspection, Emmeline frowned and offered me a look I could have sworn was laced with pity. She sighed and patted my hand. I'm sorry, Daddy, but Santa is not in there. Santa won't be using the chimney this year, and the loss of this magical tradition has created a family rift. In the sense that our fireplace has a mantle and a place for firewood, sure, it looks like a real fireplace. But in a sense that you can't actually burn anything in it without destroying the rest of the house, well then, it's a sham. It was filled in years ago, so there is no chimney or flu, no charred brick. There is only a tiny, marble-sized hole in the very back where a gas pipe once entered. It is, in other words, no place for an obese stranger burdened with a sack full of gifts. When I was a child, Santa always used the fireplace. Before going to bed on Christmas Eve, we'd leave a plate of milk and cookies by the hearth. Doing the math and figuring the loss of a few sugar snacks was worth waking up to a morning of endless bounty. My parents would lead us into the family room, delighting over the fact that Santa was an unapologetic slob. If any of us three boys had left chimney soot all over the carpet, we'd never hear the end of it. But when Santa did it, it was apparently cause for celebration. My parents would titter, why, would you look at that? And we'd instinctively flinch, feeling somehow culpable. These myths vary from household to household, child to child. The son of a friend will be on vacation this year and is concerned about how Santa will find the forwarding address an entire country away, never mind that he hasn't ever before left the entire Eastern seaboard in the lurch. My best friend grew up in the Philippines and celebrated Christmas in a really bizarre fashion - without Santa at all. On his first holiday in the United States, a relative happily shouted, come look what Santa did. And Joe froze, sure that someone had stolen all his toys. Well, how was I supposed to know, he told me. No one ever broke into our home to give us things. This year, Emmeline is increasingly interested in these fledgling magical mysteries of childhood. We read "The Night Before Christmas" every day now, and I figured, if Emmeline could buy into the story of wingless, flying reindeer, she'd eventually come around to the notion that the fat guy from the mall could fit through a tiny gas pipe. In a family of jaded atheists, it was the true miracle of Christmas. At the fireplace, Emmeline inspected the hole again, poking a hesitant finger through the opening. She looked up with unblinking eyes and asked, Santa fits in there? I nodded, whispering, Santa can do anything. Emmeline paused for a moment, smiling hopefully. But mommy said he just climbs in the window. At least we have another day to get our traditions straight.
Host: Mike Adamick lives in San Francisco with his wife and their pint-sized doubting Thomas.