Host: When Americans lose their jobs, many of them apply for unemployment insurance. Here in California, though, that well is running dry. The state's unemployment-insurance fund could be in the red as soon as next month. Joining us now from Sacramento is Loree Levy of California's Employment Development Department. Welcome to the program. And Loree, can you give us a sense on average, how much money does California pay out in unemployment insurance per day?
Guest: Yes. Right now, we are actually paying out between $25 to $27 million a day in unemployment-insurance benefits. We have certainly seen a huge increase in demand for unemployment-insurance benefits. In fact, from the third quarter of 2007 to the third quarter of 2008, we've seen about a 78 percent increase in the demand for UI benefits.
Host: So, it's probably little surprise that you're running out of money. What's going to happen if you run out of money by next month? What do people do?
Guest: You know, I think the most important thing for people to know is that benefits will continue to be paid. I mean, those benefits obviously are very critical to people at a very stressful time in their lives. So, those benefits will get paid. It's just really a matter of where the money is going to come from. In the short term, California has already applied for a federal loan to cover the cost of those benefits.
Host: Loree, you mentioned applying for a federal loan. I'm sure you're aware of this - you're not the only person asking the federal government for money. So, how can you be certain that you'll get it?
Guest: You know, there's actually a set-aside fund specifically for loans to states facing insolvency issues with their UI trust funds. In fact, employers pay two different unemployment taxes. They pay their state unemployment contributions to the trust funds to pay for benefits, but they also pay a federal unemployment tax for the administration of the program, and some of that money goes into a pot that specifically pays for loans. So, that's what's intended to do. The problem is that if we cannot pay back that loan, we will owe interest to the federal government, which we will have to pay for out of state funds instead of unemployment funds.
Host: A lot of people who are losing their jobs right now, this might be their first time being unemployed and applying for insurance. And I've heard a lot of stories of people finding out afterwards that they don't qualify because maybe they're taking a training class or they don't have the right paperwork. What practical advice would you offer people who recently became unemployed if they want to get insurance?
Guest: You know, the first thing I can say is make sure you get all your paperwork together, some of your checks stubs; make sure you know who you worked for and how much money you made and so forth, because we're going to be asking you some questions to kind of verify your identity. And I would say, sometimes people hesitate to file for unemployment; don't do so. File right away and do so online. That is by far the most convenient way for people to file and probably the less frustrating, because right now, we have such a huge demand that our phone system is jammed.
Host: Loree Levy of California's Employment Development Department, thank you.
Guest: My pleasure. Thanks, Alex.