Host: Country music has a shining new star. Darius Rucker is the former front man for the 1990s pop group Hootie & The Blowfish. Now he's the first black artist to have a Top 10 country hit since Charley Pride. His debut single, "Don't Think I Don't Think About It," made it all the way to number one.
Guest: (Singing) Saw you in the rear view standin', Fadin' from my life. But I wasn't turnin' 'round, No not this time. But don't think I don't think about it. Don't think I don't have regrets. Don't think it don't get to me, Between the work and the hurt and the whiskey. Don't think I don't wonder 'bout, Coulda been, shoulda been all worked out. I know what I felt, and I know what I said But don't think I don't think about it.
Host: Darius Rucker had successfully crossed over from pop to country music with his chart topping solo album, "Learn To Live." Darius joins me now at our NPR West studios. Thanks for coming in.
Guest: Thanks for having me.
Host: So it's so exciting to have you here at NPR West, and to have you - you're going to perform for us. So, I'm very psyched about that.
Guest: Yeah, I'm glad to (unintelligible) you all. I love playing and Glen(ph) and I've been doing this a lot. So it's finally starting to get tight. So, I'm excited to be here, too.
Host: So you've walked a lot of roads in music. And start me out on the first one. When did you first know that you wanted to be a musician?
Guest: Oh, when I was four. I was four and I just - when I was four all I would say was I was going to be a singer when I grew up. You know, I was going to be Al Green. That was it for me as a kid. I just wanted to be a singer and, you know, I got a little older and you really, you know, realize you've got to have a real job, and all that stuff. So I went to school for broadcast journalism, and just happened to meet the guys in my band in college.
Host: Broadcast journalism? That's not a real job.
Guest: True.
Host: Yeah. So you met your band in college and you guys expected that you could make a living? And oddly enough, you did better than that.
Guest: Yeah. All we wanted to do was make music as long as we wanted to. As long as we could be a band as long as we wanted to. And we signed to Atlantic and, you know, everything took off. (Singing) Only wanna to be with you. You know, we came out and everything went crazy, and we had to sit back and just laugh, you know, and go what's going on, man? We're just a bar band from South Carolina. (Singing) Sometimes I wonder If it will ever end. You get so mad at me When I go out with my friends. Sometimes you're crazy, Then you wonder why. I'm such a baby, yeah, That dolphins make me cry. But there's nothing I can do, I only wanna be with you.
Host: Tell me about your roots in the South and how they influenced you musically?
Guest: Oh, big time. I grew up, you know, in Charleston, South Carolina, and I'm 42 years old. So for me, a lot of what I remember back in the day was AM radio. And when I was a kid you could hear Stevie Wonder and Buck Owens on the same channel. You know, that was a thing for me that just listen to AM radio, flipping through the channels and hearing these songs. That was where I really developed my love for music. That was where all the walls and lines between music were just taken down for me when I was a kid because I just loved everything. I couldn't understand why everybody wouldn't listen to a country song, everybody wasn't listening to, you know, Rock n Rolls songs. I thought it was awesome.
Host: Radio's gotten a lot more segregated since then, hasn't it?
Guest: Yeah. That's an understatement. I mean, the - today everything is so specialty oriented. It's one kind of music and that's all you get to hear on the radio and, you know, I liked it when I was a kid and you could hear anybody on the radio station as long as it was a good song or a hit.
Host: So you go - you're in Hootie & the Blowfish, you have any number of talents and interests musically. "Learn To Live" is doing so well commercially. Your R&B record did not find quite the same home.
Guest: Yeah.
Host: Why do you think that's the case?
Guest: I remember them playing my single, which I thought was just an R&B song, and somebody used the word alternative on R&B radio. And I think it was the stigma of where I came from. There was R&B music, it's just that I came from Hootie & the Blowfish and nobody wanted to hear that from me. You know, I was cool with that. I made the record I wanted to make and I was happy with it, but you know, I don't think that record got - I think it got slapped on a lot, but that's OK.
Host: Well let's talk about this record right now. "All I Want."
Guest: (Singing) Don't act surprised, It ain't like you didn't know. It's been a long, long time comin' And it's time for me to go. Tryin' to split things up Could drive us crazy.
Host: So where'd that song come from?
Guest: That song - Frank Rogers is my producer, and we got together - it was the first time we had met each other, we were talking about what kind of record I wanted to make. And I told him I really wanted to make a country record, and that was the first song we wrote together. You know, we're both really happily married guys, and you listen to that song and it's a big divorce song. And people think the theme of country music, you know, my baby left me, my dog left me, and all that stuff, and so we just wanted to write a real basic country shuffle, and we came with "All I Want" and I love that tune. I love playing it live, you know, and having Brad Paisley play it on the record was an amazing thing. And I'm a big fan of that tune.
Host: You, I understand, got a phone call from Maya Angelou? I don't know anything about it, but I was told to ask about it by my producer, Devon. So there must be something there. What's the story?
Guest: I was listening to the - you know, Maya Angelou on the radio and she was talking about her love for country music. And one thing that she had said that I was so - I agree with so much, is she said she was disappointed how much - how music's so segregated. Like people will say, without ever hearing a country song, I hate country music, and you've never heard a song. (Singing) I heard every word you said, I'm tryin hard to understand. Exactly what it is you need From me. Baby I apologize, I never meant to make you cry. But there ain't no doubt, We can work it out, yeah. I just sent a CD to her and she loved it and she called and wanted me to be on her show, and it was out of this world.
Host: A lot of your life you've spent in front of audiences where there probably aren't that many black people.
Guest: Oh yeah.
Host: So what is - what's that like?
Guest: It's something that I think I've kind of really kind of gotten used to it over the years. But back when we really started taken off, it would be really strange to walk into a room with 20,000 people and you were the only African-American person in the room. I mean that happened a lot. And it's one of the things where I really had to come to grips with it. I mean, I chose this life. I chose this job. This is what I wanted to do and, you know, I just - now it's no big deal, it's just the way it is. I love my job and I'm not going to change my job. So that just comes with the territory.
Host: There's so many, what I call racial sharing moments going on right now and we, you know, we take them seriously, but we can also laugh at them. But sometimes have you ever felt that people ask you to be their guide into some greater understanding of blackness?
Guest: Oh, absolutely. You know, I've been playing Hootie & the Blowfish for 23 years, and we, you know, we've been doing' it. And I think my friends use me as a - like you said, as a vehicle to experience - and I know a lot of people that probably when they met me were pretty racist people, that are now really good friends of mine. And like a friend of mine, he's from King, North Carolina, and he grew up pretty racist. You know, and he started hanging' out with me, we became good friends and I remember four or five years ago he goes home for Thanksgiving and, you know, they start at the table and he gets up and walks out of the house. When things like that happen I feel that's a good thing, you know.
Host: What do you love at this stage of your life about, not music itself, but being a working musician, and what do you hate about it?
Guest: Hate is the easier part. I hate being away from my kids and my family. That's really tough to be gone as much as I am. And I love to play live for people. I love to see people, you know, enjoy themselves and enjoy music. And when it's my music it's even better.
Host: What do you think is going to happen to art as we go through these tough times?
Guest: Oh, I think art will survive. During these times, movies and music don't seem to suffer that much because, I mean, music gets you through all this stuff.
Host: And where are you headed next? I mean, in terms of creatively. Are you going to go back and make another country album? I mean, what do you think - besides touring, which I know you are...
Guest: Yeah. I'm on a tour and then I'm going to make a country records back-to-back for a while. Until country radio doesn't want me anymore, or I get my own theater in Branson(ph).
Host: My goodness. Sounds like you've got plenty of options.
Guest: It's going to be fun.
Host: Darius, thank you so much.
Guest: Thank you for having me. This was awesome.
Host: Well, I can't wait to hear from you. You're going to play a little bit for us, right?
Guest: Absolutely. This is a new single off my record. It's called "It Won't Be Like This For Long."
Host: That was singer, songwriter, and musician, Darius Rucker. His new country album is "Learn To Live." You can watch his in-studio performance at our website, nprnewsandviews.org.
Guest: (Singing) You didn't have to wake up. You've been up all night. Lyin' there in bed listenin', To his newborn baby cry. He makes a pot of coffee, Splashes water on his face. His wife gives him a kiss, And says it's gonna be OK. He won't be like this for long. One day soon we'll look back laughin' At the week we brought her home. This phase is gonna fly by, So baby just hold on. It won't be like this for long.