Host: From NPR News, it's Day to Day. This morning in a press conference in Chicago, President-elect Barack Obama named New Mexico Governor Bill Richardson as his commerce secretary. Here at Day to Day, we've been trying to get a better sense of the new cabinet members by checking in with people who know them as friends. Today, we're going to find out a bit more about retired Marine General James Jones, tapped to be Mr. Obama's national security adviser. Joining us now is his friend, Congressman Ike Skelton of Missouri. Welcome to the program.
Guest: Well, thanks so much for having me, Alex.
Host: So, how do you and the retired general, James Jones, know each other?
Guest: My gosh, I think - I can't even remember when I first met him. It's been so long ago. I'm sure I met him when he was head of the legislative liaison over the Senate. But I really became acquainted with him when he became a brigadier general, and, of course, I followed his career. Of course, he served very ably as a commadant in the marine corps and then as the European commander, just been with him from time to time. And I just consider him a very good friend.
Host: And what kind of a man is he? How would you describe him as a person?
Guest: A man of extreme integrity, high ability, good judgment, even temper, just admired him so through the years, and I just can't say enough good things about him. He is just an excellent choice, and he will give good advice to the president.
Host: You mentioned that you went to him often for advice. Can you give an example of a situation in which he imparted some of his wisdom to you?
Guest: Well, I know I've talked to him a great deal about the Balkans when that was a strong issue. I know I've talked with him about terrorism and the insurgency. He has a good grasp of the challenges that are out there.
Host: One of the roles that he may well play is kind of smoothing out the relations between President-elect Obama and his secretary of state to be, Hillary Clinton. The two were once rivals. Can you give an example of how he might go about in mediating, making sure that everything runs smoothly?
Guest: Well, I don't think you're going to have to ask that. Senator Hillary Clinton is a real pro. She's a great American. And she will know and understand her role. I just have no qualms about their needing any mediation whatsoever, and I don't think Jim Jones or anyone else will have to do it.
Host: Can you give an example, politics aside, business aside, maybe of a time that you two shared together that just gave you a sense of what he was like?
Guest: We made a trip, as I recall, to the Balkans a good number of years ago when he was a one star general, and just sitting with and listening to him tell about the intricacies of situations there. He has a good handle on the problems that that faces. I think his great forte is understanding the problems that we face. He's had great experiences. You know, he was raised - a good part of his youth was in France. He speaks French fluently and understands Europeans quite well, and his being the Allied commander in Europe was absolutely a perfect fit. And he can expand that in giving advice in problems, literally, all over the world.
Host: I read that James Jones went to Georgetown University, where he played basketball. Do you have any sensed of maybe whether he and President-elect Obama might discuss security issues over a game of hoops?
Guest: I wouldn't doubt it. President-elect Obama would also find he's a competitor. That ought to be an interesting basketball game.
Host: Congressman Ike Skelton of Missouri. Thank you.
Guest: Thank you.