Host: To political news now, and how is this for burying the hatchet? Hillary Clinton as Barack Obama's secretary of state - that's the political rumor de jour. Transition team officials aren't saying anything on the record, but off the record, they're saying she is on the short list. NPR news analyst Juan Williams is here now for our weekly chat. Hi, Juan.
Guest: Hi, Madeleine.
Host: Well, what is the argument for giving the job to Senator Clinton? After all, the two did not exactly see eye to eye on foreign policy during the campaign.
Guest: Well, there are two levels of argument. From the political angle, if you leave Hillary Clinton in the U.S. Senate and of course, Hillary Clinton is there kind of to lead Democrat-pressure opposition to an Obama administration and to kind of carp and complain when he doesn't meet expectations coming from the left. But there's a more serious level, and it goes like this - and it makes her, actually, right now the favorite for the secretary of state's job, which I think is something we would not have foreseen even a week ago - that increasingly, the old hands around the Democratic Party foreign-policy apparatus have all said, wait a minute, are you thinking about Bill Richardson? Are you thinking about John Kerry? Are you thinking about Chuck Hagel? to President-elect Obama, and he says yes. And they say, but imagine if instead, you were sending Hillary Clinton over to foreign capitals and - to deal with people who are quite difficult. The stature would be far greater, and Hillary Clinton, as a part of your inner circle, would add to your stature in the country and among Democrats.
Host: OK. So, speaking of the Senate and Senator Obama, he will resign his seat on Sunday. His replacement will be appointed by the governor of Illinois, Rod Blagojevich. Who are the likely candidates, and who's likely to actually be appointed?
Guest: Well, the most likely candidate and the person most likely to be appointed is Jesse Jackson Jr., the congressman from Chicago. But there are a range of candidates, and it's quite interesting because, as you know, the governor is in political hot water himself. His numbers are very low. There's all sorts of talk of investigations and the like. So, the question is, would he, potentially, maybe appoint somebody who's a close ally in the state legislature? There's the 73-year-old Emil Jones. Then, what about pressure from the Hispanic community? There's Congressman Luis Gutierrez. And there's also talk about Tammy Duckworth - Tammy Duckworth, who runs the Veterans Affairs Department for Illinois, and she is a double amputee and close to Obama. But there are also people who might be potentially opponents for the governor going forward, like the attorney general, Lisa Madigan, or the treasurer. So, there's all these kinds of angles to the game that are very interesting. But it looks at this moment, most likely, that you're going to end up with Jesse Jackson Jr.
Host: OK. And Juan, what was your best political conversation of this week?
Guest: Well, you know, everybody's talking about the fact that there's so many Clinton people going into the administration, and this led to an interesting conversation where John Podesta, who was a chief of staff to President Clinton and now is running the transition committee, had really - an interesting choice, and I think this was a choice that was made by Joe Biden to pick Ron Klein, who was Vice President Gore's chief of staff, to be his chief of staff. And the question becomes, then, is this really the Clintons' return? And it comes in an unusual package, because remember that Senator Obama defeated Senator Clinton. And so there are lots of people asking questions about, well, you know, is it just the third term for President Clinton? And I think the answer is no. But, right now, if you looked at this transition, I think lots of people are just scratching their head and wondering how far this goes and whether it's just a case that the Democratic bench is limited to Clinton people after two terms of President Clinton.
Host: Although the other side to that argument is you've got experienced people hitting the ground running, and you're not going to have the disarray that you saw when President Clinton was first elected, when he did bring in a whole band of outsiders.
Guest: Exactly, and what - you know, the problem there was that you had people who were in the campaign suddenly thrust in the positions of government responsibility, and sometimes that made for big-crash accidents and for a rush of a very socially liberal agenda that then really set back the Clinton administration for its first term.
Host: NPR news analyst Juan Williams, always a pleasure talking to you. Thank you.
Guest: My fun. Thanks, good to be with you, Madeleine.