Host: This is Day to Day. I'm Alex Cohen, and I am not ashamed to admit, this holiday season, some of my dear friends and family members will receive gifts which I previously received from someone else. It's called regifting. And with more on the topic, here's independent producer Vanessa Romo.
Guest: Chances are, opening presents around the Christmas tree tomorrow, you'll be surrounded by two types of people, regifters and those who believe regifters should be carted off to an igloo colony. I know which parka-wearing camp I'm in. But what about the rest of the world? Or rather, what about a random sample of coffee shop goers and gym worker outers. Unidentified Woman #1: I teach etiquette to children and young adults. And regifting is one of my favorite topics. Unidentified Man #1: Am I a regifter? Well, until five minutes ago, I imagined regifting was regiving a gift, but I wasn't too sure. Unidentified Woman #2: Regifting. Unidentified Man #1: But since I heard you talk about it, am I regifter? No, I'm not. Unidentified Woman #2: Oh, OK. Regifting? Never. I think it's tacky. Unidentified Man #2: I would say that my mom is a very wonderful candidate for somebody who would regift. Well, it's not even that she's a candidate. She is a regifter. Are you a regifter? Unidentified Man #2: I am indeed. Tell me why you're a believer in regifting? Unidentified Woman #3: Oh, recycle, reuse. Save the planet. Unidentified Man #3: Once you've been raised from a parent who lived through the Great Depression, then it's pretty normal. Unidentified Man #2: I tend to take all of the kind of random gifts that I get throughout the year and just kind of store them for potential gifts for Christmas. Unidentified Woman #3: And I got some dish towels recently that I'm going to regift at Christmas with baked goods. Unidentified Man #2: Well, she'll take cards that people have attached onto a Christmas or birthday present, and then generally, she'll cross off the name and then write somebody else's name onto it. Unidentified Man #3: Boxes of chocolates, colored pencils, the works. Unidentified Woman #4: It's like a little baby outfit. Unidentified Woman #1: What is your intention? Is it just to get rid of something that you absolutely don't want? Or is it something you really like, can't use, have no use for that you can genuinely give? Unidentified Man #4: In Christmas of 2006, one of our lovely members here at the YMCA gave my cousin Chris some earrings, and he passed them off to our business manager. And then she gave them to me the day before yesterday and recommended that I give them to my girlfriend, and I don't have a girlfriend, all the ladies out there. Unidentified Woman #5: I think that would suck. Unidentified Woman #1: I think our culture, we're just not taking the time to get to know our family and our friends, to what I really think you might want. Unidentified Woman #6: Because I gave it to you with all my heart, and then you give it to somebody else. Do you know anybody who'd been busted doing that? Unidentified Man #5: My dad. Unidentified Woman #6: One of my friends. Unidentified Woman #1: I do know a girl who received a gift from a nun. And she gave that gift to her sister. And then I was at the party where the sister returned it to the nun. True story. In terms of the etiquette of it, is it proper etiquette? Unidentified Man #2: You know what? I do kind of think it's tacky. Unidentified Woman #1: I personally think that it is a very functional thing, especially in this economy. Unidentified Man #3: I am not as embarrassed as I would be if I didn't have a gift ready when I received one. I feel like it's far better to be prepared in these type of situations. Unidentified Woman #7: I think we all might - all be receiving regifts this year. So, if you're lucky enough to get presents this year, may they be exactly what you wished for, even if it came from Aunt Susie's boss's cousin's friend's sister.
Host: That was independent producer Vanessa Romo. She spoke with Don DeGrute(ph), Mario Alvarado(ph), Alex Becker(ph), Martha Cordova(ph), and Lawrence Epps(ph).