Host: When you see a homeless person asking for money, what do you do? Maybe you give them whatever change you have or the leftovers from the restaurant you just left. Maybe you divert your gaze and simply walk away. The question of what to do in this situation came up recently on Slate.com. Patty Stonesifer and her daughter Sandy offered some answers. Patty joins us now from Seattle. Patty, you wrote that you usually decide not to give to the half dozen people or so that you see begging for money each day. Why not?
Guest: I made the decision that I really wanted to be part of addressing homelessness in my community, and so I give, where I can, to organizations and a plan that is in place in this community to address homelessness on a citywide basis and concentrate my money and my efforts around that plan.
Host: Another one of the options that's out there, one that your daughter mentioned, is not giving money, but giving food, which is something I think a lot of people think to do, especially because they fear that if they give cash, it could be used for drugs, alcohol. Is that a fair assumption to make?
Guest: Many experts on the homeless do acknowledge that there is a certain amount of addiction disorder in many of the homeless population. But I think it's important to understand that the majority of homeless people are not present in those you see on the street. That said, my daughter has made the choice that when she does her weekly grocery shopping, she buys and shares a sandwich with the gentleman that she sees on the street regularly, and she feels that that is something that she does as just part of her own being a human who cares about this gentleman that she sees regularly. That is not an adequate response to addressing homelessness in her neighborhood or community. And I think that's important to understand, that addressing the individual's needs with food or some other kind of supply or service may be a good way to address their own needs and the immediate needs of that person, but isn't sufficient to address the bigger problems that exists in their community.
Host: I remember years ago being in New York and hearing this piece of advice, that ethically speaking, it might be better to look a homeless person in the eye and treat him or her with respect and give them absolutely nothing than it would be to give them $20 but not even look them in the face. What do you think?
Guest: Well, I think that we need to think about the broader issue, which is that the folks who are homeless today, who may face homelessness in the future, need to be supported by us as citizens in the community and addressed by us as members of our community. And if that means looking them in the face, if that means paying attention to the article about homelessness in your local paper or using your time or money to do something about it in your community, that's the real way we address our own humanity, our own connection to community, and our connection to that person. That said, we all like to be recognized by our neighbors, and looking away is a classic aversion technique. And if we avert the situations in our community, we won't do much to address them. So, I think it both serves the basic humanity of that person, our own basic humanity and our community best to openly address and greet the persons that we - are our neighbors that happened to live on the street.
Host: Patty Stonesifer was the CEO of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. She writes for the new Slate.com column called "My Goodness," which is an advice column, looking at how we can all use our time and money to make a better world. Thank you, Patty.
Guest: Thank you.
Host: More to come after this.