Host: I'm Farai Chideya, and this is News & Notes. If you think of the Air Force, you might think, well, airplanes. That seems logical. You might think of air-craft carriers, combat and the airmen and women who put their lives at risk. All of that is true, of course, but what about entertainment? The Air Force puts on a serious traveling variety show. A man named Kahlil Ashanti went to some of the toughest places in the world to entertain his fellow airmen and women. Now he's turned his Air Force experience into an off-Broadway one-man show called "Basic Training." Kahlil, welcome.
Guest: Hello. Hi, how're you doing?
Host: I'm doing great. So, describe what people see when they come to "Basic Training."
Guest: When people come to "Basic Training," they're kind of immersed in this interactive theater world where they get to see my journey. The night before I left for "Basic Training," I found out that the guy who had abused me my entire life wasn't my real dad. And my mom swears she told me before; she said I probably just forgot. And so me, in trying to leave this childhood behind, I begin this journey of joining the military in trying to forget it all. But while I'm in the military, I end up trying out for Tops in Blue, which is an international competition of talent. Everyone - if you think "GI Jane" meets "American Idol"...
Host: Wow.
Guest: On steroids, that's what Tops in Blue is. And it's serious stuff. It's a lot of fun. There's a little break dancing, a little pop locking. And once again, it's very interactive. It's very much a very different theater experience.
Host: You know, we had on Brian Copeland, who has a very successful one-man show called "Not a Genuine Black Man" and also dealing with some really very harsh realities of his childhood. It strikes me that, you know, that's got to be part of what shaped you as a person who's able to do - what is it? How many characters do you have in the show?
Guest: Twenty-three characters.
Host: Twenty-three characters. I mean...
Guest: No costume changes, no props.
Host: Did you go into being someone who could be so mutable in part because you had to kind of - you had to have a place to escape, I'm assuming?
Guest: You know, I think that's exactly what it was. I remember as a teenager that - you know, I was born in Germany. I lived in Japan 'til I was 10 and then, you know, moved to Iowa, which is where I graduated high school. But you know, just being surrounded by so many different cultures, I just found myself kind of being a sponge. And so, as an extracurricular activity, I ended up, you know, doing standup comedy, you know, telling jokes to my friends. And I think you're right. I think it ended up being an escape into these different characters to be able to make people laugh. And it kind of made, you know, kind of made me laugh on the inside as well, because everything on the outside was really, really hurting.
Host: Can you either give us a snippet of a character, to be in character or show how you transition between characters?
Guest: Sure, there's a character that is everyone's favorite. His name is Uncle Tony. So, Uncle Tony, there's one point in the show - I have to set up this clip for you because everyone says the show seems like a movie. Uncle Tony is attempting to avoid helping me find my dad because of a devastating family secret and it goes something like this. (As Uncle Tony) Look here, brother man. That explains why you did not receive your letter, brother. I mailed that letter in February, which happens to be Black History Month, the shortest month of the year. I paid 41 cents for postage, my brother, a quarter, a dime, a nickel and a penny. Now if you look at the quarter, dime and the nickel, you will notice that the presidents are faced to the left. On the penny, Abraham Lincoln is faced to the right. Now, why is that? Why did these three presidents turn their back on Abraham Lincoln? Because he helped the black man; that's why they put them on the lowest denomination of currency, the darkest denomination of currency and the only one that russ(ph)... Uncle Tony, Uncle Tony, Uncle Tony. My dad. Can you just give me the information? So, that's kind of the little snippet of...
Host: Oh, yeah.
Guest: People I ended up dealing with.
Host: Oh yeah, we all have an Uncle Tony who - little bit of a conspiracy theorist, just a little bit.
Guest: That's right.
Host: Now, what was it like doing the shows with Tops in Blue? I mean, what kinds of shows did you put on, and what kind of places did you go when you were in the military to put on these shows?
Guest: Oh, my goodness, Tops in Blue. We went - performing the shows with Tops in Blue was the most amazing experience of my life. It was - to describe the show to you, it was kind of a - if you've seen "Bring in 'Da Noise, Bring in 'Da Funk," kind of a really hip journey through music. You know, we do '20s; we do some '50s; we do Motown. It was - whatever is on the top of the chart, you would see Tops in Blue perform with a live band, singers and dancers, who were also their own technical crew, which meant that, you know, being Tops in Blue is the closest you get to being famous and still being in the military. But they keep your head small by making you set up and tear down 50,000 pounds of equipment every single day. So, we do 140 locations all over the world. You know, we did Guantanamo Bay, Cuba; we did Okinawa, Japan. My 21st birthday, I spent it in Thule Air Base in Greenland. You name it, we were there. But Tops in Blue was formed in 1953 to perform for the troops on the frontline. So, when we go to the Middle East - Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, Baghdad Airport - those were the shows that meant the most because the troops would be sitting on their tanks, watching the show. And that just makes you want to give a little bit more.
Host: What has been the reaction of folks who come to the show who are either in the military or people who even served with you? What do they think?
Guest: They have been absolutely amazed. It's been a standing ovation almost every single performance, which I feel really blessed to be able to say, because these are tough times to be paying tickets for anything - you know what I mean? - to pay money for anything. So, the response to the show has been, A, it needs to be made into a movie and a book and, B, is it true? Where are these people? How can I go see Tops in Blue, and can I send friends to see the show? The New York response has been absolutely overwhelming. And even all over the world, you know, I've taken this show to Dubai, Abu Dhabi, Melbourne, Australia, Vancouver, Canada. No matter where the show is played, it has consistently sold out, and I'm loving it.
Host: Yeah, I saw something from your visit to the Fringe Fest in Scotland, and...
Guest: Yes.
Host: What is it like coming and finding a place in New York's theater world? Because it can be very tough to even get a little purchase in it, but it sounds like you have found a place with your off-Broadway version of the play that's very comfortable and fulfilling.
Guest: Well, it is definitely - yeah, I have to admit, I wish I could sit here and say I knew it was going to happen this way. I was nervous waiting for that New York Times review to come out. You know what that's like. You know, it was like, OK, you know, am I going to get the theater gods' blessing? Because New York it is what it is; it's the Big Apple. It's the biggest theater market in the world. If you can make it, here you can make it anywhere. So, this feels really good to have, you know, not just the approval from the critics, but just be able to, you know - I shake everyone's hand who buys the ticket every time I perform my show. I stand at the door as people leave the theater; I shake their hand and look them in the eyes and say thank you. So, I really feel like just because the reviews are great, I still know that it's reaching people, and that's what's important to me.
Host: All right, Kahlil, thank you.
Guest: Thank you.
Host: Kahlil Ashanti is the writer and star of "Basic Training." It's an off-Broadway one-man show about his life in the Air Force. He joined us from our NPR studios in New York.