Host: And no one's partying at the big banks today. In fact, CEOs are waving their 2008 bonuses. Business Week senior writer Nanette Byrnes is wondering why they're eligible for bonuses at all.
Guest: Thanks, but no thanks. That's what executives at Bank of America, Citigroup, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and Merrill Lynch, among others, have said to bonuses in recent weeks. But what are these bonuses for? Unprecedented risk taking? Missteps? And destruction of shareholder value? Bankers aren't the only ones with bizarre pay. The small Seattle biotech company Cell Therapeutics lost almost all of its stock value last year. But its top brass received bonuses, including nearly half a million dollars for the CEO. Clearly, shareholder return was not the only measure used to calculate his reward. Last year, homebuilder Toll Brothers got into hot water also over a 17 and a half million dollar bonus for its CEO. Wasn't 2008 one of the worst years for construction in generations? Bankers have learned something from the auto industry. CEOs from Detroit got into hot water for their private jets while asking for a taxpayer-funded bailout. Billions in taxpayer assistance shouldn't come with a million dollar CEO bonus for a chaser. But public relations aside, what about real pay reform? Among the banks, only UBS is going beyond smaller bonuses. It's completely overhauling executive pay plans. Top managers there won't get bonuses for at least three years. At the end of that period, if the company is doing well, they'll get the extra cash. And UBS is paying its chairman just a fixed salary. He's not eligible for a bonus. A sharp rethinking of pay packages is in order across all industry. Boards of directors need to watch what kind of risks they're paying executives to take. And payouts over three to five years, like the UBS plan, make sense. They'll make sure managers have to eat their own cooking. Companies need to act now. Investors are clamoring for executives to give back bonuses they've already received. After all, if Bernie Madoff's unwitting investors have to give back their ill-gotten gains, why shouldn't executives have to return money they didn't deserve in the first place?
Host: Nanette Byrnes is a senior writer for Business Week.