Host: And that was the inimitable Tony Cox of NPR. And now, it's letter time. Our editor, Sasa Woodruff, is here with me. Hey, Sasa.
Guest: Hey, Farai. How's it going?
Host: I am doing fabulously. So, what are folks saying this week.
Guest: Well, as you can guess, letters about politics are stuffing up our inbox. Dan McCaffy (ph) in Roselle, Illinois wrote in after he heard us discussing voter registration fraud reports. It concerned the association of community organizers for Reform Now, or ACORN. He didn't like what our guest, political analyst and author Earl Ofari Hutchinson, had to say about the reports. Dan wrote, his dismissive attitude that the problem is isolated to one state and his defensive comment likening this to the one purported voter suppression of the GOP was out of line. This is probably one of the most important history making elections of the century. Any problem in the system, regardless of which candidate it benefits, flies in the face of democracy.
Host: Then we got a couple of letters about what's called the Bradley Effect. It concerns voters who tell pollsters that they're going to vote for a black candidate, but when it comes to casting a ballot, they switch their vote. David Clemmens (ph) in Fort Worth, Texas wrote us this. I believe the Bradley Effect is happening before the election. In 2008, with the economy in a shambles, two wars, and a very unpopular president, the Democratic candidate should be leading by double digits. I believe that is a sign of the Bradley Effect and racism, either conscious or subconscious.
Guest: But Phil Rutledge (ph) in Franklin, Tennessee, had a different take on the discussion. Phil wrote, I am tired of hearing negative comments about people not voting for Obama because he is black. What about all the people that are voting for him because he is black. Are they not just as wrong for voting because of race? I have never heard a news item on people voting for his race. Well, thanks to both of you for writing. We understand that the nuances of race are complex, at best. Because of these many layers, our editorial staff has decided to do a month-long series on race in November. We hope you listen.
Host: And finally, Colleen Shandell(ph) in Watauga, Texas sent us some love. I merely want to congratulate you on a very informative, interesting, and entertaining hour of radio. I enjoy hearing many points of views on many subjects on News and Notes. This is a very important hour for listeners at this time in our history. After listening to you and your guest, I feel more informed and more able to speak with clarity and knowledge on many subjects. Thank you.
Guest: And thank you for your letters. Please keep your comments coming.
Host: Now, NPR has a new way to chime in on our stories. Go to our program page at nprnewsandnotes.org, and select a segment. There you can click on the comments link and write us your thoughts.
Guest: And you can still send us you gripes and praises by logging onto npr.org and clicking on Contact Us. Be sure to tell us where you're writing from and how to pronounce your name.
Host: Thanks, Sasa.
Guest: Thanks, Farai.