Host: As we mentioned, the looming threat of failure in the auto industry reaches well beyond the carmakers. It also affects the businesses they contract with like auto parts makers. Tom Mullen is the chief executive of an auto parts company called TNT EDM in Plymouth, Michigan, and he joins us today on the phone. Mr. Mullen, your company supplies parts like connecting rods, engine components, things like that?
Guest: Yes, we supply tooling that produces the parts and in some cases we actually supply the actual parts. The tooling that we do supply would make 5-10,000 parts per tool.
Host: I imagine you're watching Washington pretty closely right about now. What's going on into your mind as you see what's happening there?
Guest: You know, I think, Alex, what's really going on is everybody is looking for somebody to blame. Nobody wants to look in the mirror. Last week, you know, they want to blame, you know, Rick Wagner. They want to blame the bond holders, and now today they want to blame the union because they don't think the union has given enough. But the bottom line is, I think everybody is giving. Now, I don't understand why, you know, the government doesn't just step in and say listen, we bailed out all these banks, the overseas banks. Why don't they just tell the banks that they lent the money to to take care of the auto companies. Reduce the rates down to five percent instead of the auto company is paying eight to 10 percent on some of their loans. And let everybody get back to work because the bottom line is, if everybody does their job, including the Republicans and the Democrats who seems to have temporarily forgotten who they really do work for, OK. I don't think any of them had to worry about making payroll. Enough of the the bickering and the fighting, OK? We all have to come together, whether a Democrat or a Republican, whether you're an auto worker or an aerospace worker or medical field and, like I say, if everybody just did their jobs, life is real simple.
Host: By some estimates, General Motors and Chrysler owe roughly $10 billion for auto parts to people like you. What's been going on at your company? Are you getting the checks that you're supposed to be getting?
Guest: We're getting them, but they're very, very delayed. You know, normally, you know, a good customer would pay within 30 to 45 days. Now what we're seeing is the good customer will pay you within 60 to 90 days. But what's happening now is we're being stretched by the tier one suppliers to 90 to 120 days. And it's only because they're being stretched, too, and it's simple economics and simple cash flow. I mean, if the cash cow is not selling cars and the perception is out there that people don't want to buy them. The fact of the matter is General Motors has sold more cars than Toyota. Ford has sold more cars than Nissan and Honda. So, these politicians really don't know. They get stuck on one little thing. It's like they're looking for something in the pepper pile to dwell on instead of looking at the whole overall picture. Now last I know, you know, we made eight and a half million American cars last year. I think there's too many false positives that they're definitely portraying out there to the American people.
Host: Tom Mullen is chief executive of an auto parts company called TNT EDM. It's based in Plymouth, Michigan. Thank you, Mr. Mullen.
Guest: You're welcome.
Host: Stay with us on Day to Day from NPR News.