Host: This is News & Notes. I'm Tony Cox. Who says bloggers don't get any respect? Monday night's primetime presidential press conference was a history-making moment for online journalists. Geoffrey Bennett is the digital producer for News & Notes, and he joins me now. Hey, Geoff.
Guest: Hey, Tony.
Host: Listen, so tell us about this big moment for political blogging.
Guest: Right. Well, President Obama held his first full-scale press conference early this week, and he invited blogger Sam Stein of the Huffington Post to ask a question. It's the first time a blogger has been called upon at such a session. And Stein asked the president whether or not he'd support investigation of the Bush administration's Department of Justice. Now, the Huffington Post, we should say, is a left-leaning, progressive news and opinion site, which also supported the Obama campaign, but the White House made another digital aero(ph)leap this week. They live-blogged the president's town hall meeting in Fort Myers, Florida, so when visitors went to that Web site, they got a real-time, written update about the event. But the White House doesn't allow for, you know, user comments, so there was a level of interaction that was limited, but you know, still (unintelligible).
Host: It's still not maybe not a big, big step but a step nonetheless.
Guest: Exactly.
Host: All right. In a minute we're going to talk to three of our regular bloggers, but what topics are getting attention in the black blogosphere this week?
Guest: Well, this ongoing and developing saga between singers Chris Brown and Rihanna. The president's proposed stimulus package is getting kicked around online as well. This is from the blog Political Season. He writes: Half of America is very weary of the bailout, and the other half loathes it, and nobody understands the logic going into it. Is it just me or would it have made a whole lot more sense for there to have been some public disclosure so that people understood the urgency and the emergency involved? And this is from the blog Cob(ph): Like the woman who was pregnant when she voted for Obama because she thought he'd change America's health-care system in time for her baby, a lot of people are going to be disappointed to find that the stimulus plan is not going to be as broad and timely as the economy will be wiping out jobs.
Host: And after today's developments, they are probably going to be even more confused in terms of what's about to happen. What can people find out on our Web site this week, Geoffrey?
Guest: Well, we've got two recent in-studio performances, one from Maisha, another one from Asha. They're both female singers who go by one name.
Host: They're both good, too.
Guest: Yeah, very good. Very good. So great interviews, great music, and it's all at nprnewsandviews.org.
Host: Geoff, thank you very much.
Guest: Thank you.
Host: Geoffrey Bennett is the digital producer for News & Notes, joining me here in the studios of NPR West.