Host: I'm Farai Chideya, and this is News & Notes. The latest projections show more than 136 million voters went to the polls yesterday. That means two-thirds registered to vote actually did. That's the best turnout also since 1908. Some voters still had to brave long lines and malfunctioning machines. Here to update us on polling and voting rights, we've got Sherrilyn Ifill, she's a civil rights lawyer and a law professor at the University of Maryland Law School. Hi, Sherrilyn. Sherrilyn, are you with us?
Guest: I am.
Host: OK. Any sign of polling difficulties that were out of the ordinary in a way that prevented people from having their say?
Guest: Well I think it's going to interesting to see what we learn over the next few days. In many ways because people were caught up in the euphoria of this election. I think some of the information is going to drip in. We had long lines, most people recognize that, long lines for early voting in states where there's early voting, and then long lines yesterday in many states. Here in Maryland, we had one polling place in which there was a four to five hour wait, in Prince George's County. We had one polling place in Baltimore city in which there was a four-hour wait. So we know there were problems. What was interested is as I talked to people around the country about whether they had problems, they'd say things like, no, I had no problem voting, it went just fine. And I'd say, how long did you stand in the line? And they'd say, two hours. People were willing to accept that as normal. They were told that they were going to have to spend a long time in the line. People were very excited about this election and wanted to be part of it. And so many people kind of took it casually that they waited two hours or 90 minutes to vote. I think that's problematic. And I think after the excitement of this election calms down, we've really got to go back and take a serious, hard look at the way we run elections in the United States. We've seen now with nearly 65 percent of the electorate voting in this election, the highest participation in over a century, that, you know, people do want to vote when they're excited and passionate about the candidates and the race. And we've got to come up with a way to make voting more accessible. Waiting in line for two hours, three hours, four hours, that isn't the way a fairly old democracy like the United States ought to be able to do it. We've got to start to look at some of the initiatives that other countries use, voting on the weekend, we've got to get rid of this Tuesday, you know, in the middle of the week. The magic of the first Tuesday of November is lost, I think, on a lot of working people. We need to get to weekend voting. And so we're going to have to open up our process a lot more, because we now see want to vote, and that people shouldn't have to face impediments like standing in line for two hours.
Host: That's the - that's looking ahead to the future, but it seems as if there are very few people - do we know of any legal challenges for example by the Republican Party or, you know, even by the Democratic Party if they've lost a local race about the election overall?
Guest: Well I know that we've - you know, we've got the recount happening in the Minnesota Senate election. And so we're going to see what happens there. There have been complaints about the way that election was conducted that came, you know, information that was - that came from the Obama campaign and that came from the Democratic Party that Al Franken is using for part of his focus on that recount. We've got a number of other close questions in California on the gay marriage ban, here in Maryland we have a very close race in the first Congressional district. And so some of those may end up yielding a closer look at some problems. We also have, as we've had in previous years, some allegations of robo-calls on election day. And those are to be tracked down. I think that there are going to be some on-going investigations into some of these calls that told voters - text messages that came in to voters, saying that due to long lines, Obama supporters should vote on Wednesday, November 5th. It's going to take a while to figure out whether those can be traced and tracked down. And so as I suggested, I think the days ahead as the euphoria over the Obama campaign continues, we're going to really get down to the nitty-gritty of the things that did go wrong, of the places where not enough poll - not enough machines were allocated for polling places, places in which - a number of places in Philadelphia where voters showed up and they just simply were not on the rolls, although they have voted in that precinct in the past. And so therefore those voters were given provisional ballots, which of course are not counted on election night. Because, you know, Obama won Pennsylvania handily, we tend not to focus on that immediately, because we're not talking about a close race and a recount. But those issues are nevertheless problematic, and we need to know what happened.
Host: When you look at... Excuse me. At some of the voting issues you mentioned, or the changes that you want, who is actually working to make that happen? And just, you know, a short list, or a sense of who actually could push forward some national changes?
Guest: Well, there've been a number of grassroots organizations and civil rights organizations that have been pushing for election reform. Demos is one of them, the Advancement Project, and of course the traditional Civil Rights organizations as well have been noting the ways in which, obviously, these barriers tend to disproportionately affect those who live on the margins of society, disproportionately affect racial minorities, those who are poor, rural voters, elderly voters and so forth. And so there are a number of civic organizations that have really been asking us to begin to look at this issue. A huge entry into looking at our electoral system, for example, has been the whole issue of ex-offenders in voting. And that's been a very active issue for a lot of groups as well. To begin to look at the barriers to voting for those who are reentering into society from being incarcerated. So it really runs from soup to nuts, the groups that are looking at these issues. What's been interesting is the - what - the failure, or the lack of, real aggressive interest by the two political parties in beginning to take up some of these more open and innovative ways of opening up the election process.
Host: Sherrilyn, thanks so much.
Guest: Thank you.
Host: That was Sherrilyn Ifill. She's a civil rights lawyer and a law professor at he University of Maryland Law School. She joined us from the studios of WEAA in Baltimore, Maryland.