Host: This is Day to Day from NPR News. I'm Madeleine Brand. Today, we're replaying some of our favorite pieces from our archives. Carol Lin worked in the news business for 20 years. She covered wars, disease, droughts, but nothing prepared her for this news. Her mom has cancer. Carol shared her story for Day to Day in May of 2008. I never thought I could reach 80. I really never thought. This is my 80-year-old mother, Joanne. She's a petite Chinese woman who stands 5 feet tall. She's sweet but stubborn, a whirling dervish who's not comfortable sitting still.
Guest: (singing) Happy birthday, dear Joanne.
Host: And she drives me crazy.
Guest: (singing) Happy birthday to you.
Host: Thank you. Thank you all. Do you remember when you had me paged at McDonald's when I was 17 years old? (Soundbite of laughter) Oh, yes. Yes. I mean, you ran red lights. You would knock on people's doors. You would track me down at Shakey's Pizza Parlor or McDonald's. Well, when I woke up, you were not home. I was horrified. I was horrified, so I woke up your dad, and say, let's go find Carol. What were you so worried about, though? What could possible could have happened to me? Anything could happen. Trust me. Things aren't any different now that I'm an adult who's traveled the world, I'm raising a child, but my mom would still say it's her job to take care of me. She says I don't have enough hand towels at my house. Washing hands, there's no towel there. Mom, there are towels there. When she comes over to visit, she's even been known to bring her own sheets and pillows, pots and pans. I want her to see me as a grownup, but she treats me like a child. Then, suddenly things changed.
Guest: OK, your temperature is good, 97.0.
Host: So the bad news was that the biopsy confirmed that the cancer is now back. Yeah, it is... Much sooner than we had hoped. Doctor John Timmerman is her lymphoma specialist at UCLA. Five attempts at aggressive radiation and chemotherapy haven't stopped the cancer from coming back. I'm sad because I really wanted this to last longer. Yeah. I'm satisfied, though, that we tried really hard. You had a great... Yes. Attitude. What would you like to do? I'm happy while I'm living. If I can live two more years, I will be very happy. A few minutes later, I grabbed a private moment with the doctor. How should we think about time? Well, she said two years that she would like. I think that's pretty optimistic. So I think we're looking something more realistically at a year or less, but I hope I'm wrong. My mother is unusually calm about this horrible diagnosis. I think this is part of my faith, you know, and I believe that my day with God arranged for me, then I will take it. There was only one other time that I saw my mom with this kind of clarity. It was when my husband, Will, died unexpectedly of a rare cancer. Our daughter was just a baby, only 10 weeks old. I told God I cannot die now because my daughter needs my help. I need to help her to go through this difficult period and see what I can help out, Chloe. And that's why I said I will be grateful if I can live to see Chloe at five. But you know, I didn't want her help. I sort of blamed her for Will's death. Her constant worry was like an ancient Chinese curse. I thought her haunting fears had infected my life and might somehow taint my daughter. When I was holding the baby, she said, Carol, the baby's too cold, put on a sweater. That's when I snapped. My words were angry and cruel. I've really regretted that day. I want to understand why she is so critical of me and so fearful. What are you doing, sweetheart? Huh? Why are you doing this? I'm recording you. Oh, recording me. Maybe the answer lies in her past, something she refused to share with me before the cancer. My family was pretty well off at that time... I had no idea that my mother's mother was an illiterate farm girl married off to an older wealthy widower with servants and slave girls. There was a room for bathing. A servant had to heat the water... At first, I'm listening to her to describe her idyllic childhood. But then, I learn her father died unexpectedly. My grandmother becomes a young widow, and the family is plunged into poverty. I realize that was the beginning of crisis after crisis for my mom. My mom fled with her classmates to the hills during the Japanese War. When she dared to go home, she hid under the floorboards of her house to keep from being raped by marauding soldiers.
Guest: Trouble in Manchuria, famine conditions, these and other problems are facing Chiang Kai-shek.
Host: By 1949, China was exploding, and my mom was among the last wave of people to get out before the communists took over. She must have been so scared. She was only 22 years old. That was my saddest memory in my life, leaving my country, leaving my family. At that time, I never thought that I I will see them again because it's just so uncertain that we didn't change. Why didn't she tell me these things while I was growing up? My mom and I spent months talking. OK. Now, I put the egg in the fried rice. You always seem more comfortable in the kitchen than anywhere else. Do I? Yeah. I don't know. My husband taught me how to cook after we got married... Daddy taught you how to cook? Yeah, because he... I don't know. This is news to me. He does not cook a lot, but he know better than - because I never cook. I told Carol I cook lettuce. I thought it was a cabbage. We even talked about my career. I was expecting you to become nurse. But you... Do you remember when you sent out my news director, Jose - you said who expect Carol would be so successful? Do you remember that? Yeah, that's true, because I would never have seen you will go into television. What did you mean by that? I was so shocked when you said that. You're so competitive. I would never think that you could find a job. What? Did that have something to do with your confidence in me? I don't know. I just thought (unintelligible). No. I think you're protective. As I learned my mom's story, I understand that the odds of her own success were always against her. That makes it easier for me to stop feeling so criticized. And I finally ask for her advice. What do you want to teach me, your daughter, about the example that you're setting in this fight against your cancer? Courage, just courage to know that there is always something possible, that you don't think anything is impossible. She still touches a nerve when she buys me hand towels and comments on how I'm raising Chloe. But her love and respect have always been there. She's just dished it out in ways I couldn't always hear. OK, honey. And that's ready. Thanks, mom. For NPR News, I'm Carol Lin. That story originally aired in May of last year. We asked Carol for an update on her mom. She says she's doing great. All her scans are clear. And inexplicably, she is the only survivor in her clinical trial.