Host: Back now with Day to Day. 'Tis exactly a week before Christmas, a few days before Hanukkah kicks off, and if you are still on the hunt for holiday gifts, well, we are here to help. We're joined now by Brian Westbrook. He covers technology for KATU TV in Portland, Oregon. And he is here to share his top tech picks for 2008. Hi, Brian.
Guest: Hi.
Host: So, if listeners tuned in a few days ago to NPR's All Things Considered, they probably heard their list of really inexpensive tech gifts. But here on the show, we like to go for the finer things in life. Brian, you picked out a camera that is going to set folks back at least $1,000. Tell us a bit about it and why you should drop so much cash, when you can get a digital camera for a way less.
Guest: Well, folks are really excited about taking a lot of pictures, especially around the holidays. But remember, we want to be thinking about our summer vacations and things coming up as well. The Nikon D90 Digital SLR, it's a new camera from Nikon out this year, and it does one really cool exciting thing - among the many exciting thing it does - but my personal favorite feature is that it has a live-view mode that takes high-definition video camera, as well as the great still pictures you can get. Now, why would you buy a digital SLR as opposed to a regular point-and-shoot camera? These cameras, you can allow - you can plug in different lenses; you can make them higher resolution, and a lot more low-light photos; and this is a very non-intimidating camera as well.
Host: For a few hundred dollars less, you note that you can get something called a netbook. What is that? And what's your recommendation for the best netbook out there?
Guest: The netbooks are a small, slimmed down, portable machine that are good for a couple of key things: getting on the Internet, checking your email, that sort of thing. The HP Mini 1000 is fantastic. It slips in your purse. It's really easy to go and take with you. No more lugging around your big notebook computer. You've got a super slim machine to go, and it's under 500 bucks.
Host: Excellent. So, now, if you need to spend even less than that - let's say, you've got about a $50 budget - there's a phone that's on your list, what is it?
Guest: It's the LG Lotus Phone, and it's available from the Sprint. You can buy it in black and purple. Of course, the purple color is the flashy color that you really want.
Host: There's an item on your list; it's the Flip video camera, and I can personally endorse this one. I got one for my nephews a few years back. And they're totally fun, super simple to use. You say now there's a new Flip camera. What can it do?
Guest: Yeah, the new Flip camera does HD, so high-definition video. The great quality of high-definition pictures comes into a super slim, about a sized of cigarette pack, and the USB port, like the traditional Flip cameras, flips out of the top, plugs right into your computer. Makes it super simple to download clips. A lot of people don't like to fumble around with cables. They don't like to mess around. This is a really easy-to-use high-definition camera.
Host: Now, I've got a technical question here. When you say high-definition video, what do you have to be watching this on to actually see the difference after you've shot something with a Flip camera?
Guest: That's a great question. You'll see the high definition on your computer, and you can plug your computer into your TV. Some TVs have the ability to watch the video directly. But when you upload it to YouTube, obviously, you're going to get a lot less resolution because you're working over the Internet. So, you'll see it on your computer. You can make a DVD of the high resolution, but you're not going to see it if you upload your clip to, say, YouTube or one of the video-sharing sites.
Host: Finally, the last item on your list is the Wii Fit. Now, people might have heard about this one before. You can exercise with it, do yoga with it. What else can you do with the Wii Fit? Why should you get it?
Guest: Now, not only are there Wii Fit - these work-out applications that it comes with, but there are all sorts of other fun games, things like snowboarding and other activities that you can get for the Wii Fit. The Wii Fit is a great accessory for those that are maybe, you know, kind of burnt out on the shoot-'em-up games for the Wii. But they want something a little more fun. They want to be able to exercise and work out at the same time.
Host: Brian Westbrook covers technology for KATU TV in Portland, Oregon. Thank you, Brian.
Guest: Absolutely. Thanks for having me.
Host: You can find the full list of gadgets we talked about at npr.org/daydreaming.