Host: New Year's is right around the corner and that means, once again, a lot of us will vow to lose weight. Well, what lengths would you go to to shed those extra pounds? One man from Green Bay, Wisconsin, went all the way to China. Alonzo Bland joins us now from the Aimin Fat Reduction Hospital. Welcome to the program.
Guest: Thank you. Thank you.
Host: Well, why are you in China? Why did you go all the way to China to lose weight?
Guest: I went to China because it's away from everything I know - all of the excuses that I would have normally to not focus on bettering my health and so forth.
Host: Well, China, it is a long way to lose weight. What is it specifically about China that drew you? I mean, you could have gone anywhere outside Green Bay, Wisconsin.
Guest: There's a form of medicine here that's been around for quite some time called traditional Chinese medicine, and they've fused a little of that with Western methods such as diet and exercise. The TCM basically consists of different herbs, acupuncture, a procedure that they call cupping to remove the toxins from the skin, and it's really - you really feel wonderful after a cupping treatment or acupuncture, to my surprise.
Host: Now, I understand that you actually entered a contest that a company was sponsoring to go to this hospital in China, and that you made your own video and entered the contest and won.
Guest: Yes, yes, I did. The company was China Connection, and I ended up doing my video in my robe, just a rough draft, and I submitted it. And to my surprise, the next day, I got a call from the CEO, Ruth Lycke, and told me that I had been chosen to go to China. And that was definitely an amazing feeling.
Host: So, right then, your life changed. You quit your job. You made plans to leave your family for a year and go to China.
Guest: Well, yeah. My weight had gotten so out of control that I wasn't even working at that time, unable to work.
Host: So, when you got there seven months ago, how much did you weigh?
Guest: I weighed approximately 646 pounds.
Host: So, a lot.
Guest: Yes.
Host: That's morbidly obese.
Guest: Definitely.
Host: And how much have you lost in seven months?
Guest: Today, I am at 401 pounds, so that's about 245. Yeah.
Host: That's an incredible amount of weight loss.
Guest: Yes, it is. It is. And it feels so much better. It really does. I'm able to do things I haven't been able to do in years - just walking, taking a nice walk, you know, during the day or play basketball. I actually play basketball. And just other things, like I can't remember the last time I actually sat in a chair and was able to rest my elbows on my knees, and I did that. And it really was an emotional moment because these are things that I haven't been able to do in so many years.
Host: What's their reaction to you there in China?
Guest: Initially, when I first arrived, there were a lot of stares. Of course, you know, they probably have never seen someone that looks like me, you know, and my size. And so, you know, it was a little awkward, uncomfortable at times. But I'm happy to say that now, the people here in Tianjin are - they've warmed up to me quite well, and I get all types of encouragement. When I'm out and about and the individual that sees me, and they don't speak any English, they will do hand gestures to show me, OK, you know, you were big and now, you're small. And they'll give me the thumbs up and a big smile, and I'll say thank you and keep going.
Host: How do you say thank you in Chinese?
Guest: Xie xie.
Host: Xie xie. Well, Alonzo Bland, xie xie. Thank you so much for sharing your story with us today.
Guest: Thank you.
Host: Alonzo Bland is living in Tianjin, China. He's at the Aimin Fat Reduction Hospital, hoping to lose 400 pounds.