Host: And in more political news today, Democrat Al Franken has been declared the winner of the Senate race in Minnesota - almost. The State Canvassing Board has certified that Franken won the race over Republican Senator Norm Coleman by a tiny 225-vote lead. The board has been recounting the three million votes by hand since the election in November. But when I spoke earlier with Minnesota Public Radio's Mark Zdechlik. He said there are still a few technicalities holding up the final decision.
Guest: The governor of the state of Minnesota, Governor Tim Pawlenty, Republican, needs to certify the winner of the election, and that probably will not happen until any legal contests to this recount are completed. Once the canvassing board signs off on the recount and stamps it as completed, the loser will have up to seven days - calendar days, not business days - to file a legal contest to the recount. And it's very likely that that's going to be happening and accordingly, that we will not have a certified winner for some time in Minnesota.
Host: Well, if you stick to that calendar and start filling in little blanks for January, do you actually go over into February when you're trying to figure out the schedule?
Guest: Well, I think that's anybody's guess right now. It just depends on what type of litigation is filed, if anything does come, and how long it takes to work it out.
Host: Of course, Norm Coleman could say, could he not, well, OK. I'm a good sport. There it is.
Guest: Absolutely. That is something that needs to be considered carefully for Senator Coleman. He's a relatively young man, very successful politician from his time as a mayor of St. Paul to his time in the Senate, and there's a lot of rhetoric from his legal team right now. But who knows? Once this looks like it starts to get being wrapped up, the senator himself may decide that it's not politically advantageous for him to drag this into a courtroom.
Host: If Norm Coleman were to do that, to say, well, I won't fight it any farther, isn't he in a way disenfranchising and disappointing, to say the least, the people who voted for him?
Guest: Well, I suppose that's a risk he would have to take. I think, though, that you look at this numbers, this is so close right now, and that, at some point, somebody's going to have to take that Senate seat. And if Senator Coleman looks at it and decides that this is not going to behoove him, it's not going to further his political career to fight this in court, he might make that decision. And his supporters might be happy that he leaves himself potentially better positioned for another job down the road, maybe the governor of Minnesota or something.
Host: New York Senator Charles Schumer said yesterday that Franken had already won the election. Until recently, Schumer was the head of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee. Does that sort of open declaration carry weight there?
Guest: Well, enough weight that the Texas senator, John Cornyn, who's the chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, put a release out last night expressing concern about the statement that Senator Schumer made and also noting that Senator Schumer, while he's no longer the chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, he's the new chairman of the Senate Rules Administration Committee, so I would say that what he says probably does carry some weight. And that certainly did not sit well with some Republicans in Washington.
Host: Mark Zdechlik is following the Senate race for Minnesota Public Radio. Thank you, Mark.
Guest: My pleasure. Thank you.
Host: Stay with us on Day to Day from NPR News.