Host: What goes in the clubhouse stays in the clubhouse - until the baseball manager writes a book, that is. It's Thursday, and if you haven't guessed, it's time again for a look at sports with our very own sports guru, the New York Times Sports Columnist, Mr. Bill Rhoden. Mr. Bill, what's up?
Guest: Hey, the great Tony Cox. How you're doing?
Host: I'm doing great, man. Joe Torre, leaving New York as a beloved figure, but now he has written his autobiography, "The Yankee Years." I know that he's been on his New York tour. People are buying the book. But, you know, some people are happy, some people not so happy.
Guest: Well, the people who are most important to be happy are happy. The publisher of course... Anybody reading book, it's about selling books. And I, Tony, I sort of equate it to in football, the most important statistics for a receiver are yards after catch.
Host: That's true.
Guest: And that's what the book is about, yards after catch and, you know, people are talking about, you know, why isn't Derek Jeter or anybody saying, you know, Derek's job is not to, you know, throw down field blocks, you know, for Torre, I mean it's - listen, man, it's - it's all good. People are talking about it and, you know Torre is - yeah, he's not making anything up.
Host: Well, I'll tell you what, out here in California, the owner of the Dodgers, Frank McCourt, apparently has told Torre that he can't write a book here. He can write one, but not two. Is this a big deal now, these guys writing these books, giving away what goes on behind closed doors?
Guest: I mean, I think you're going to see if - I think what you're going to see is a lot owners and general managers, you know, telling clubs, hey listen, you're going to have to sign a contract that you cannot, you know, do this. That you're going to sign a non-disclosure form that what goes on in the club policy, in the corporation stays here. But it's too bad for us because as media, we love this stuff.
Host: Absolutely. Let's talk about somebody else who's in the media every once in a while, Barry Bonds.
Guest: Yeah.
Host: Trial is set to get underway. He's pleaded not guilty for the third time. A federal judge unsealing documents the prosecutors say prove that Bonds knew he was using performance enhancing drugs. So, are we getting closer to something actually happening or is this thing going to just drag on forever?
Guest: Well, you know, it depends, Tony. What this document doesn't necessarily prove that Bonds knew. And that's the missing link here, when it proves - and it depends on what - what goes into evidence, it proves there was a conversation about it, it proves that there was an informant who was trying to set up Bonds and Greg Anderson. What's not really decided, does it really prove that Bonds knew, but beyond a shadow of a doubt. Right now, the trial is set for March 2nd. I really wish, I mean, with the economy the way it is, they're spending millions of dollars on this pursuit. I think they should just give it up. They should settle. Bonds' career is already ruined. He's not getting into the hall of fame. I think they should go over to him and say, listen, enough is enough. We're going to stop this chase and we're going to settle this out of court.
Host: Well, you know it's interesting how different media personalities in sports are dealt with when it comes to the issue of illegal substances. I'm talking now about eight-time gold medalist, Michael Phelps who gave people an idea of what the fish does out of water... When pictures surfaced this week showing what appears to be Mr. Phelps smoking a bong - presumably with Marijuana in it. He's apologized but, you know, let's talk about the impact that this will have on his endorsement deals and also whether or not his treatment in the press is different for a significant reason than the way Barry Bonds is treated.
Guest: The treatment is - let's start with the treatment first. I was just at the Super Bowl and Santonio Holmes was the most valuable player. And as you know, in October he was caught with some marijuana in his car.
Host: Right.
Guest: And you know, it triggered this whole thing, you know, oh, the black athlete and these guys get too much money. And what's wrong in the ghetto and, you know, the whole thing, you know. You know, even at the press conference well, sir have you turned your life - you know. And you contrast this with the treatment of Phelps - the endorsements, well, listen, you know, it's OK and we stand by him, and you know, boys will be boys. Tony, it's a complete double standard on the part of the media. I can't fault Phelps if he smokes reefer, he does, and that's another issue that I feel strongly about, but I think the issue here is the double standard in terms of perception of a white star athlete which has been built up and a black athlete. And it's old and I'm tired of it but it goes on.
Host: Now, there's another angle to this, potentially, I'd like to get you to respond to it that is, beside the racial difference, Phelps was a superstar, international, global superstar with his performance in the Olympics. Does that in some way insulate him because of his accomplishments in his sport?
Guest: I think it insulates him because the media allows it to insulate him. And you can argue that it's even worse. You know, that here is a guy who - we built up as the American hero, and the champion, and the breakfast of champions and, you know, that kind of thing and this is the second time - thing, Tony. This isn't his first.
Host: Yeah, he had a DUI before this.
Guest: Yeah, there was a DUI and now this. And again, everybody is saying well, he's young. I'm just saying, then if - if that's going to be the standard, then let's let everybody off the hook. If youth is the thing that we are talking about here, then let's let everybody off the hook. But if we're going to hang people for these indiscretions, particularly the second time, let's hang anybody. I think what lets him off the hook is that a lot of companies have a lot money tied up in him.
Host: All right, we'll have to keep our eye on that one. You mention the Super Bowl. I was going to bring up Santonio Holmes but you did it. You know, last year you and I had a bet about the Super Bowl which I won. This year, I guess you are afraid...
Guest: No (laughing).
Host: To bet - to bet with me. Were you surprised that it turned out the way that it did? I know you thought Pittsburgh probably was going to win, but I bet you were really scared with about a minute left in the game.
Guest: I was stunned. I mean, I thought, you know, I thought the game turned at intermission, you know, when the NFL's most valuable player rumbled a hundred yards Harris(ph) within a reception. But yeah, I was stunned by the catch. I think the entire world was stunned by what has to be the most perfect throw and catch in Super Bowl history. I mean...
Host: That's even better than the Dwight Clark catch in the - with San Francisco 49ers.
Guest: Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Absolutely. I mean, you know, last year you had, you know, (unintelligible) catching, you had the miracle catch you know by a throw...
Host: By David Tyree. But that was kind of a weird that was - the helmet catch, you're talking about.
Guest: The helmet catch (laughing). But this was just - I mean, it was perfect, Tony. It was perfect form, the toes and - had it been a millisecond higher, he wouldn't have been able to get anything down. I just think that from Roswell Berger's(ph) throw and hosing the ball, the extra tenth of a second, it - right now that's the most perfect ending play in Super Bowl history.
Host: It was absolute - you're absolutely correct. Our time is out, but I'm going to ask you about this before I let you go. Talking about perfect performances, two people strolled in to New York's Madison Square Garden and lit up the Knicks back to back, Kobe Bryant 61 on one night and LeBron James, I think, it was 52 the next night and a triple double.
Guest: All I can say is thank god for the Knicks.
Host: And, you know what? And the Knicks are even actually better than they were before and then they still let people come in there and just spank them like crazy.
Guest: That's what we do.
Host: There's absolutely nothing you can say about that and yet they still haven't been able to figure what to do with Stephon Marbury.
Guest: Well...
Host: We'll talk about that next time.
Guest: Yeah, we'll talk about that next time (laughing).
Host: Bill Rhoden, thank you very much, my man.
Guest: Hey, Tony, you take care of yourself. It's always a pleasure.
Host: Bill Rhoden is a sports columnist for The New York Times and he is author of "Third and a Mile: the Trials and Triumphs of the Black Quarterback."