Host: And now, we are going to turn to Congresswoman Maxine Waters. She sits on the House Financial Services Committee, which has jurisdiction over TARP. Thanks for joining us.
Guest: You're welcome. How are you doing?
Host: I'm doing quite well. Always great to talk to you. We just heard from Deroy Murdock, who gave an analysis as a conservative, as a Libertarian conservative that basically said the president is doing us wrong by moving ahead with a program like TARP. Party lines have been divided over this, you know, within the Democratic and Republican parties. What's your perspective on the usefulness of TARP and how the money that has not been allocated is best used?
Guest: Well, let me kind a give you a little bit of the history of TARP. As you know, we were confronted with an emergency situation where the secretary, Secretary Paulson, came to us and said, we're in a crisis. Over the weekend prior to his being in contact with us about our crises, he had engineered a big sale on Wall Street because it appeared that if one of the big banks that was involved in the sale had gone bust-up on that weekend prior to the markets opening on Monday morning, it would have triggered a depression. When he came to us as the treasurer, knowledgeable about the economy, describing the dire situation, he had a four-page proposal. It really did shake everybody up. But we tried to put some meat on the proposal and not just give him what he was asking for with no strings attached. What we basically said was, OK, the situation that you're describing is a crisis. And what we're going to do is, we're going to go along with your request for a bailout. But we're not going to let you spend 700 billion. We're going to give you half of that. We're going to give you some flexibility. And then you've got to come back and report what happened with that money, how did it work? We have to examine, how did it affect the crisis - the economic crisis that you are describing? And then we'll decide whether not to go forth with the additional $350 billion. Now, I want you to know, nobody knows exactly how to fix this problem. And so yes, we did give him flexibility and had to trust that what he was saying and what he knew was as good as the information we could get. So we agreed that the epicenter or epicenter of the crisis was the sub-prime meltdown that had created all of this foreclosures. That's what was causing the breakdown in this economy. We agreed at that time that the government would go in and buy up all of the toxic paper in these financial institutions.
Host: Well, Congress...
Guest: So that we could modify them.
Host: Congresswoman, we don't have very much time left.
Guest: Yes.
Host: But I do want to ask, what about accountability? What safeguards do you think should be put into the disbursement of the additional money, but also to what's already been given out to make sure that it goes to do what you want it to do?
Guest: Well, obviously, based on what happened the first time, when the money didn't go for what we thought it was going to go for, we have to design in the bill that Barney Frank is going to put forth a lot of criteria for getting the money, for spending the money, reporting back, responsible to all of that must be built in to the degree that we can do it.
Host: When you think about what that would look like, give me one example, one small example of how you...
Guest: Well, first thing we have to say is something in the neighborhood of 40, 50 to a $100 billion must be spent on foreclosures. And it must be done this way - we're going to use the FDIC Sheila Bair plan because she has shown working with IndyMac that she knows how to do loan modifications. And that has to be written into the bill. And then the other thing that you have to do is, you have to develop criteria for who is going to get this money and why they're going to get it, what kind of reporting they have to do, and some prohibitions against being able to get the money if you don't do certain things. For example, we can't be giving bailouts to CEOs who have big stock options and bonuses and all of that has got to be written into the tough legislation.
Host: All right. Well, congresswoman, thank you.
Guest: You're welcome.
Host: That was Congresswoman Maxine Waters. She sits on the House Financial Services Committee and represents California's 35th district.