Host: Just a couple of weeks ago, we looked into the future of African-American publishing. But when it comes to buying books, it's hard to choose just one. Well, a new collection of writings by African-American authors and essayists has just been released which could solve your book-buying dilemmas. Professor Gerald Early is the editor of Best African American Fiction and Best African American Essays and he joins us now at News and Notes. Welcome, Gerald.
Guest: Thank you. Thanks for having me.
Host: Now, the books were released on inauguration day. I don't know if that was significant or not. Tell us if it was and what inspired these collections?
Guest: Well, these collections I have been thinking about for a long time. I've been talking about it with my agent for sometime about doing something like this. The big fear was that, no publisher would be that interested in it because they wouldn't think the collection could be sustained over a period of time doing it every year. But Bantam believed it and so Bantam, we ultimately made a deal with Bantam to do it. The date wasn't really significant. I mean, the date turned out to be significant but we had set the date a long time before and we were just hoping that Obama would win so the date would really have some significance but it was all an accident. It turned out well though.
Host: Now, you're going to - we've had anthologies before obviously. But the new thing about this anthology is that you're going to try to publish it annually. How difficult do you think that is likely to be?
Guest: I don't really think it's going to be that difficult. I really do think there is enough quality African-American writing being generated that it can sustain the series without too much of a problem. We, in the fiction volume, for instance, we now only do short stories but we also publish excerpts from noted novels that have come out during the period that the book is covering. And with the essays, we also - it's very broad what we searched to find - where we searched to find good writing. Blogs and other kinds of places and so when you really scour the field, there's a lot of good writing out there. I was surprised when we did these volumes how much good writing is out there.
Host: You know, you talk about in the introduction to the essays book that we write - black people write non-fiction but there's a question as to whether we read non-fiction or fiction more. Is there?
Guest: Well, I would tend to think that there are periods of time when black people would read more non-fiction than fiction. Right about now, I think fiction is - may actually be more popular than non-fiction. Generally speaking, women read more fiction than men and women, certainly, black women would read more fiction than black men would read. But on the whole, I don't - I think right about now, fiction would be more popular. We discovered with the essay writing that because of Obama's campaign and everything, he generated a lot. He was himself a subject of a great deal of writing among African-Americans and not only he, himself, but also a lot with politics more generally because of his campaign.
Host: Now, let's talk about the essay collection. As a matter of fact because you have works there by people like Walter Mosley, Michael Eric Dyson, I even spotted an essay by the president himself. But what topics are primarily covered in these essays if there is such a thing as a primary topic?
Guest: Well, the guest editor for the volume and each year, the volumes will have a guest editor - Debra Dickerson decided to layout the book and categorize the essays so there's a section on activism and political thought which is a pretty large section. There's a section that deals with gay African-Americans. There's a section on international. There's a section dealing with sports and entertainment, a section of friends and family and the like. Now, this doesn't necessarily mean that every year, it will be broken up in this way. As a guest editor, she had to write to classify the essays as she wanted to and this is how she wanted to do it. The guest editor of the upcoming volume of 2010 is Randall Kennedy and he may have an entirely different scheme. But the criteria was always that - the essays just had to be good, interesting, lively. Something that people would want to read and that was somehow taken together, we give people a sort of snapshot of what black people were thinking at the particular point when the book was published.
Host: You know it's very interesting you should mention that because the book - the book begins - the Americans essays book begins with the chapters on friends and family and the very first essay written by Emily Bernard is one called, "Fired: Can a Friendship Really End For No Good Reason?" I read this with great interest because this is something that I would think could touch an awful lot of people.
Guest: Yeah, it was a very -it's a very powerful essay about having, you know, she has this friend and you know, the friendship just kind of falls apart, it's perplexing as to exactly what happened with this friendship and it's a friendship between a black person and a white person. So she's going back and forth about - her thinking about what happened with this friendship. Yeah, I would think that that would be something that would strike a lot of readers. One of the reasons we arranged the book in this way was that, we wanted to start out with the message that were sort of personal and will kind of hook the reader into the volume.
Host: Something else that you've done - that you wrote in your introduction which caught my eye. You put in a definition, actually, you called it a point of clarification, what is an African-American and I thought that was curious. Why you felt the need to do - to explain what an African-American is.
Guest: Well, I thought that people might ask. I want to know, you know, like what do you mean by African-American? What is that? Well, you know, Debra Dickerson, when she did the essays and she turned in her manuscript to me with the essays, she told me at that time, she says, I don't even know if all these people are black. And it actually turned that some of people aren't black. And she said, I just like these essays and you know, I just thought they were really discussing some really interesting and powerful stuff. I just wanted to make clear that in so far as what we're doing with this volume, we're being as elastic as possible in defining African-Americans so it met anyone who's writing in English and who published something that is - was published in the United States that has any kind of African background or Caribbean background or anything, any kind of diaspora background. And Debra was open to saying, well, you know, there were a couple of essays by people who weren't African-American that I wanted to include, that I thought were important. It doesn't necessarily mean that every guest editor will feel that way but it was certainly fine with me that she did and we included those essays.
Host: Well, it certainly, was fine with you because I'm reading from your book here. This is what you said about non-African-American writers. Quote, "I have learned over the years as much about African-American life from non-African-American writers as I have from African-Americans." That's interesting.
Guest: Yeah, I've read some very important books. I mean, there've been some very important scholars in my field which I deal with African-American studies. There've been some very important non-African-Americans who have written in that field and - who've done tremendous, pioneering work in that field and who were important. And I've learned a great deal from them as a result. I feel no reason to discriminate against them in any way. I remembered that John Hope Franklin once told me that in the south African-American colleges he said were he called - were integrated so he called them, these islands of civility. I like to think that the volumes that we're putting out are sort of islands of civility where, you know, lots of people can, you know, be shoulder to shoulder.
Host: Gerald Early, thank you very much. Good luck with this project.
Guest: Thank you very much.
Host: Gerald Early is the editor of Best African American Fiction and Best African American Essays. He is also a professor of English in African-American Studies at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri. He joined us from the Studios of Washington University. That's our show for today. I'm glad you could join us. To listen to the show or subscribe to the Podcast, visit our Website, nprnewsandnotes.org. To join the conversation or sign up for the newsletter, visit our blog at nprnewsandviews.org. News and Notes was created by NPR News and the African-American Public Radio Consortium.