Host: This is News & Notes, I'm Farai Chideya. The hard economic news is going to keep coming, but this is also a time for bold action and success. Take the story of Jamie Kutch. In 2005, he traded stocks on the NASDAQ stock exchange. Then he got laid off, and took a professional leap of faith. He loved drinking Pinot Noir, and he figured he'd try his hand at making the red wine himself. Now, he's one of the hottest boutique vintners, and he's here with us. Hi, Jamie.
Guest: Hi, how are you?
Host: I'm doing great. So I'm trying to avoid the kinds of bad metaphors about sour grapes, but you could have been so much more conservative about your goals when you got the pink slip. Were you afraid about considering anything other than what you'd done professionally previously?
Guest: You know, I was so passionate and interested in wine. And once Wall Street sort of went sour on me and many of my friends, everybody tried reinventing themselves, and I thought of a lot of different careers. And over those years from 2001, where the market really downward turned, everybody almost felt bleak. Week by week, you'd sit on the cringing edge of your seat wondering what would be next. So in my heart, I always knew I wanted to try to pursue something that I loved, and wine was what took me away from the doom and gloom of Wall Street. So when I wrote a winemaker who was working in California and said, you're living my dream, and he offered me an opportunity to come out here and pursue it, I jumped on the opportunity. And I, you know, mentored under him for about six months. But with that said, you know, there was extreme amounts of work and dedication and time, and you really almost just jumped off of a building.
Host: You had to move from the East Coast to the West Coast in order to start your training and start your business. And how did you get the ball rolling once you had done this apprenticeship? And first of all, actually, let me ask something else. Were you paid for this kind of apprenticeship period? And if so, what kind of pay cut did you take, because you probably did take one?
Guest: Gosh, well, you know, it was more that I did almost a - I was almost a harvest grunt, or a harvest intern. So while I had some - a little bit of money in my pocket, I was actually coming out to do what other young gentlemen do at about 18, 19, 20 years old, to actually get your hands really dirty and clean bins and almost mop floors and things like that. So I knew that that would, though, open up doors and channels, I would meet people. And I was - I'm an aggressive New Yorker, you know, most, all of your - everybody who works on Wall Street has this big appetite or aggressive nature to succeed and push. And I think the tenacity of a New Yorker once coming out to California, that drive in the short amount of time really opened a lot of doors for me, and I was able to build a small boutique brand and express that and tell that to others, and it sort of spread like wildfire, somebody who left behind a career and went out to California to pursue their dream. And it's really been working.
Host: So I know only a tiny bit about the wine business, but I've been to vineyards where people grow their grapes and then make wine, and then I've been to wineries where they acquire grapes and then make wine.
Guest: Right.
Host: So what are you doing?
Guest: Yeah, it's a good one. I've talked about it before. It's like almost the difference between a hedge fund and a mutual fund. So the mutual fund is the big guy that, you know, can't get out of his way, and the hedge fund is small, and he has a desk and a computer and maybe a telephone. So I am doing what a hedge fund would be doing. So I basically own very little to nothing. I rent space in a winery. I pay them what's called the custom crush fee. It's, you know, $30 per case to just basically use their equipment. So I walk in and I have my space where my barrels are stacked. I utilize their forklift, I utilize their press. So I almost have - I almost feel like I have a piece of this winery, but it is only a renting. It's temporary, it's like paying rent on an apartment. And then I purchase fruit from vineyards in and around the Russian River Valley in the Sonoma coast of Northern California. And that goes about, it's not like you'd opened up the Yellow Pages to see where you can buy Pinot Noir fruit to make great ground wines. So what I did was, I was actually driving around and looked for great vineyards. I'd throw letters in people's mailboxes asking them, saying I'm pursuing and building a wine business and I'm looking to buy quality Pinot Noir, and I had some hits. I also used an old tactic of Wall Street. Many young brokers, I'm sure, cold call, and I pursued something like this also. I used the Russian River Valley Winegrowers Website to look up people's names and phone numbers. In the evening, I would call them between dinner time and pitch my story. I'm a winemaker trying to pursue a dream in California, do you have any fruit for sale?
Host: Well, let me ask you a practical question of advice for other people. Because what you do is very specific in a very specific industry, and because you were already so highly skilled in the business world, what advice would you offer people who perhaps don't have an entrepreneurial past or a business past? What kinds of things could they do?
Guest: Yeah, I would say if you have a passion or a love or a burning desire to do something in life, just go for it. You know, naturally, once I did this leap, it was - you know, a lot of doors were closed in your face, but you kept pushing and more and more doors would open. People want to help you, and if you have enough of a drive, eventually you will do it naturally just to succeed. And you know, but what makes it great is, had it been a different career, or had it been some type of a different field, I might have not have been driven to keep on pushing on those doors, because I'll tell you what, a lot of those doors are closed. But because of the passion and the drive for wine, and I think it's because of the listeners and people and friends and family and new acquaintances know your drive or your driven passion for wine, these doors naturally just almost - doors almost started to open, if that makes any sense. I'm learning by doing and just, you know, no education, and that makes it a little bit harder too. But overall…
Host: But you're doing it.
Guest: Yes.
Host: And you know, before we let you go, give me one word, and I mean one word, to describe what your wines taste like.
Guest: Wow, that's a good one. Undescribable.
Host: That's a good one. Well, Jamie, thank you.
Guest: Thank you so much. Have a nice day.
Host: Yup, you too. That was Jamie Kutch. He is the owner of Kutch Wines based in his San Francisco apartment.