Host: From NPR News, this is News & Notes. I'm Farai Chideya. Ross Perot and Ralph Nader didn't win the presidency, but they sure shook up American politics. Who are the independent and third-party candidates in election 2008, and how are independent voters reshaping the political system? With us, we've got Michael C. Dawson. He's a professor of political science at the University of Chicago. Welcome to the show. Professor MICHAEL C. DAWSON (Political Science, University of Chicago): Thank you. Glad to be here. So can you define the difference between an independent and a third-party candidate?
Guest: Well there's been independent candidates that have been quite important, such as Harold Watson in Chicago in the 1980s. But they are not necessarily affiliated with a political party or on a set of issues. Often they are around their own personalities. You might want to put Ralph Nader into that category for 2008. An independent third party is actually a party that forms under a number of different circumstances around a set of issues, a platform, usually has a slate of candidates, often runs in multiple states or in a region, or in multiple counties - in the case of the South in 1960s.
Host: So we're going to speak in a bit with Bob Barr of the Libertarian Party, the presidential candidate. But what other parties are there out there that are running in election 2008?
Guest: Well there's the Green Party, which has been a presence for several years, which Ralph Nader ran on in the 1990s, of course. There's the Constitution Party, Libertarian Party. Those are three of the biggest parties. And Ralph Nader is running as an independent this time.
Host: So given that there's been a tremendous amount of energy around the two major party candidates in election 2008, do you think that this year third-party and independent-party candidates are being overshadowed?
Guest: I think they are being somewhat overshadowed, which does not mean they won't have an effect. They could have an effect in specific states, given our federal system. It could be decisive, but I don't think in 2008 that's going to happen.
Host: Now, OK, if you decide that you want to run as a member of a third party, there is a campaign-finance rule that, you know, that basically says if you get a certain percentage of the vote that you can get federal funding. Explain a little bit more, because that was one of the rationales why some people voted for Ralph Nader. Explain a little bit more about that system.
Guest: Well there is a number of barriers that a third party candidate has to face. One is media coverage. As we know from the debates, the networks are saying you have to have 15 percent of the polling nationally before they'll put you on the national debates. There's finance. You have to qualify for campaign financing. Third is ballot access; it's another problem that third-party candidates face. And that varies from state to state. So not only does a candidate have to meet the campaign expenditures and try to get federal money - they're financing themselves, like Ross Perot - they also have 50 different sets of laws they have to combat if they are trying to run for president of the United States.
Host: What do we know about independent and third-party voters? How are they different, if at all, from, you know, people who vote Democratic or Republican?
Guest: Independent voters are an increasing trend in the United States. They've been growing steadily for a number of decades now. And they may be people that are in the middle of the political spectrum between the Democrats and Republicans. They - while - third-party voters tend to have a different set of concerns. Either they're on the fringes or extremes of the parties, like Green Party are a little more radical, less populist than the Democrats are, or they have a set of single interest or interests, like the Libertarians to the degree that the state interferes with the liberty of its citizens, from their point of view. So third-party candidates have a reason to not belong to one of the two parties, while independents may fall into that category or they may just fall into the middle of the American public spectrum.
Host: Well, thank you so much.
Guest: You're welcome.
Host: That was Michael C. Dawson, professor of political science at the University of Chicago. He joined us from the university's studios.