Host: From NPR News, this is News and Notes. From NPR News, this is News and Notes. I'm Farai Chideya. I'm Farai Chideya. Dislocated worker - that's a bit of business lingo for people who were laid off for no fault of their own. Dislocated worker - that's a bit of business lingo for people who were laid off for no fault of their own. New jobless claims haven't been this high in 26 years, but unemployment benefits don't last forever. New jobless claims haven't been this high in 26 years, but unemployment benefits don't last forever. So many of these workers are heading back to school to retool their skill set. So many of these workers are heading back to school to retool their skill set. Community colleges could give dislocated workers a path back to employment, but how will Federal plans to revive the economy deal with the cost of education and training? Community colleges could give dislocated workers a path back to employment, but how will Federal plans to revive the economy deal with the cost of education and training? With us today we've got George Boggs. With us today we've got George Boggs. He's the President of the American Association of Community Colleges. He's the President of the American Association of Community Colleges. How are you? How are you?
Guest: Hello. Hello.
Host: So, George. So, George. Are you seeing a lot of laid-off folks returning to community colleges for retraining? Are you seeing a lot of laid-off folks returning to community colleges for retraining?
Guest: Yes, we are, Farai. Yes, we are, Farai. We're getting reports from across the country that community college enrollment are increasing dramatically as people are coming back to college to take up the skills they need to prepare for their future. We're getting reports from across the country that community college enrollment are increasing dramatically as people are coming back to college to take up the skills they need to prepare for their future.
Host: I understand that Michigan, which has obviously been hit hard by auto losses among others, is a place where you see this trend. I understand that Michigan, which has obviously been hit hard by auto losses among others, is a place where you see this trend. Tell me a little bit more about that. Tell me a little bit more about that.
Guest: Yes, Michigan - the industrial states like Michigan and Ohio are being hit pretty hard, but so are the states that were subject to the housing boom, California, Florida, Arizona, Nevada, the states are in very difficult positions. Yes, Michigan - the industrial states like Michigan and Ohio are being hit pretty hard, but so are the states that were subject to the housing boom, California, Florida, Arizona, Nevada, the states are in very difficult positions. People are unemployed and going back to college to pick up these skills. People are unemployed and going back to college to pick up these skills. This is a general trend that we see in any economic downturn when the economy changes and people are laid off or underemployed and seek to gain skills. This is a general trend that we see in any economic downturn when the economy changes and people are laid off or underemployed and seek to gain skills. So they come back to our colleges. So they come back to our colleges.
Host: Now, when someone comes to you and says, you know, or comes to a community college president and says, I need training for a career of the future. Now, when someone comes to you and says, you know, or comes to a community college president and says, I need training for a career of the future. I need something that's going to last, not just training that's going to be obsolete. I need something that's going to last, not just training that's going to be obsolete. What kinds of training would you recommend? What kinds of training would you recommend?
Guest: Well, the hottest programs right now are in allied health or health care. Well, the hottest programs right now are in allied health or health care. In fact, nursing is the top choice among students today, and that's a pretty secure profession. In fact, nursing is the top choice among students today, and that's a pretty secure profession. All of the allied health careers, radiology, dental hygiene, nursing assistant, medical assistant, all of those programs are just booming at our colleges, as are the first-responder programs - law enforcement, firefighting, EMT, paramedic - those programs are exceedingly popular. All of the allied health careers, radiology, dental hygiene, nursing assistant, medical assistant, all of those programs are just booming at our colleges, as are the first-responder programs - law enforcement, firefighting, EMT, paramedic - those programs are exceedingly popular. Then, of course, we have the emerging science, technology, engineering and math fields and particularly in green technologies. Then, of course, we have the emerging science, technology, engineering and math fields and particularly in green technologies. Those are becoming very popular and, of course, the incoming federal administration is going to be placing an emphasis on those kinds of programs. Those are becoming very popular and, of course, the incoming federal administration is going to be placing an emphasis on those kinds of programs.
Host: When you think about the fact that so many people are going to have to make financial decisions about whether to work at a job that may pay less than what they've been making before versus whether or not to go to school and incur the cost of going to school or try to do the work to find money. When you think about the fact that so many people are going to have to make financial decisions about whether to work at a job that may pay less than what they've been making before versus whether or not to go to school and incur the cost of going to school or try to do the work to find money. Would you make a case that going to school is a good option, even if it might put you behind in the short-term? Would you make a case that going to school is a good option, even if it might put you behind in the short-term?
Guest: Yes, Farai. Yes, Farai. There's a lot of research that indicates that the more education the person gets, the better lifetime earnings would be - higher quality of life will be for that person. There's a lot of research that indicates that the more education the person gets, the better lifetime earnings would be - higher quality of life will be for that person. Of course, it does depend a bit upon what the students chooses to major in or to take at college. Of course, it does depend a bit upon what the students chooses to major in or to take at college. So we would encourage the students to find that career information, to speak with counselors before they decide upon an option for the future. So we would encourage the students to find that career information, to speak with counselors before they decide upon an option for the future.
Host: Now have you heard anything about how the federal government is going to deal with things like providing extra money for job retraining? Now have you heard anything about how the federal government is going to deal with things like providing extra money for job retraining? Are there any hints of how and Obama administration is going to tackle this? Are there any hints of how and Obama administration is going to tackle this?
Guest: Yes, we're quite encouraged by what we're hearing from the Obama transition team and, of course, the candidate Obama when he was campaigning. Yes, we're quite encouraged by what we're hearing from the Obama transition team and, of course, the candidate Obama when he was campaigning. And particularly, he wants to increase financial aid options for students - to increase the need-based financial aid program, which is the Pell Grant program, to make application for financial aid simpler for students. And particularly, he wants to increase financial aid options for students - to increase the need-based financial aid program, which is the Pell Grant program, to make application for financial aid simpler for students. He also has a plan called the American Opportunity Tax Credit plan which will consolidate the tax credits now, which really do not help to low income students very much, and make them more applicable to common people and lower-income people. He also has a plan called the American Opportunity Tax Credit plan which will consolidate the tax credits now, which really do not help to low income students very much, and make them more applicable to common people and lower-income people. In fact, it should make tuition virtually free for community-college students. In fact, it should make tuition virtually free for community-college students. So we're very encouraged by a lot of these policies being promoted by President-elect Obama and his administration. So we're very encouraged by a lot of these policies being promoted by President-elect Obama and his administration.
Host: George, do you think there's a risk that community colleges could run out of money to create innovative programs? George, do you think there's a risk that community colleges could run out of money to create innovative programs?
Guest: Well, that's currently what's happening with the colleges. Well, that's currently what's happening with the colleges. They have this tremendous enrollment pressure, that we talked about, caused by all of the people who want to get retraining coming into the colleges right now. They have this tremendous enrollment pressure, that we talked about, caused by all of the people who want to get retraining coming into the colleges right now. But funds are being cut to the colleges at the same time as the states are experiencing budget shortfalls. But funds are being cut to the colleges at the same time as the states are experiencing budget shortfalls. So it makes it very difficult for the colleges to accommodate all the students, and what I worry about is that many of the students will be turned away. So it makes it very difficult for the colleges to accommodate all the students, and what I worry about is that many of the students will be turned away.
Host: All right, George. All right, George. Thank you. Thank you.
Guest: OK. You're very welcome, Farai. OK. You're very welcome, Farai.
Host: That was George Boggs, the President of the American Association of Community Colleges. That was George Boggs, the President of the American Association of Community Colleges.