Host: The auto industry is perhaps the most prevalent of family businesses in Michigan. It's not uncommon for several generations of a family to work with the same carmaker. Alex Marinica is a junior at Wayne State University in Detroit. His father spent 20 years working for Chrysler. Alex, your dad recently took a buyout from Chrysler. What was behind his decision?
Guest: Well, I mean, obviously, it was a very hard decision to make. He'd been at the company for many, many years, and he really, really love working there. He thought maybe it was time to move on to some other things.
Host: If you don't mind my asking about your career aspirations...
Guest: Sure.
Host: When you were a kid growing up, your dad's at Chrysler, what did you think you'd become once you became an adult?
Guest: Well, for most of my life, my parents have actually been really pushing me, maybe not so much towards the auto field, but more along the lines of medicine and healthcare, and I'd really - right now, I'm a pre-med student, and I'm working towards applying to medical school next year.
Host: And why didn't your dad want you to continue on the tradition and work in the auto-making world?
Guest: It's definitely a tough business. He saw it was a tough business, and he just thought one of the most secure fields would be medicine, and my parents always kind of pushed for that.
Host: I imagine in the midst of all this now, you're - you guys are feeling pretty secure about that choice.
Guest: It's really a shame, everything that's happened, especially here in Michigan. I mean, I have so many friends and different family members and family friends that - of course, everyone is really nervous right now with the way the economy is going, with the way the auto industry is going. But yeah, it's definitely nice, thinking that, you know, I'm going into a very secure field.
Host: What's it like to be a student in college in Michigan right now, in the midst of thousands of jobs being lost?
Guest: There's that feeling - I mean, so many of us have parents in the industry. I mean, that's what this region is about, especially around Detroit, and Wayne State's in Detroit, the heart of Detroit. So, it's nerve-racking. Everyone is nervous. Everyone doesn't know what's going to happen next. We're all watching the news very closely. But at the same time, it's interesting, because with my generation, we almost seem to, kind of, not be as directly impacted. I mean, our family is, it puts stress on us, but the day to day of the university and the day to day at school doesn't seem to have changed that much.
Host: I understand you have friends there who are engineering majors. Do they have any sense of what their future looks like, and will be it there in Michigan?
Guest: Everybody is secure in their choices and secure in their decision. Everybody thinks that the industry will come around, especially now with the news that GM is getting money from the government. And everybody is more hopeful, and I mean, the auto industry has always been one of the largest industries and a staple in America, and to think that that industry is just going to vanish, nobody is willing to concede that.
Host: Alex Marinica is a junior studying at Wayne State University in Detroit. Thanks so much, Alex.
Guest: Yeah, no problem.
Host: Next week, Day to Day will be reporting from the North American International Auto Show in Detroit. It's the biggest auto show in the world, and this year, it's grappling with the question: what's the future for carmakers? Day to Day's Madeleine Brand will be there. NPR's Day to Day continues.