Host: This is Day to Day. I'm Madeleine Brand. ALEX COHEN, host. And I'm Alex Cohen. In a few minutes, the music industry struggles to deal with the souring economy and rapidly changing technology. First, it was around midnight last night that the Treasury Department agreed to give Bank of America a $20 billion lifeline. B of A complained it was absorbing huge losses from Merrill Lynch; it had just bought Merrill Lynch. Today, the bank revealed a nearly $2.4 billion fourth-quarter loss. Its main rival Citigroup says it will split in two. And here to talk about the future of these two megabanks and the future of the government's involvement in them is Barry Ritholtz. He's a financial adviser and writes a business blog called The Big Picture. First, let's talk about Bank of America. $20 billion, it's on top of the already $25 billion that the bank received. So, $45 billion total in tax money. Was that necessary? Was the bank in serious danger of going under?
Guest: If you believe them, it wasn't that they were in danger of going under; they were in danger of walking away from the Merrill deal, although, you know, that was the threat back in December, I guess, before the deal closed. If you don't absorb some of the Merrill losses, we won't close the deal and then you're stuck with a - the biggest brokerage firm in the country going under, and you don't want that. So, it was a little bit of blackmail on their part against the Fed.
Host: So, basically, Bank of America knew back then that Merrill Lynch was in trouble, but maybe it didn't know to the extent that Merrill Lynch was saddled with these troubled assets.
Guest: I guess, if you give them credit for being dumber than lawn furniture. I mean, who doesn't know that all these banks that were not just dallying or playing with the credit default swaps and credit CDOs, but really, really deep into it? It's amazing that people think seem to think that this was all behind them.
Host: OK, let's talk about Citigroup. They also have received the same amount from the government, $45 billion. Is it in the same position as Bank of America, saddled with all these bad assets?
Guest: Pretty much. I mean, all the major banks, and obviously, Bear Stearns was the biggest player in the mortgage-backed paper area, and then Lehman was right behind them. But we know that, you know, the famous quote from Chuck Prince at Citibank was, as long as the music is playing, we have to keep dancing; meaning as long as there's activity and housing and mortgages, we want to be a big player there. Obviously, the music stopped and it turned out there were no chairs for anybody. So, yeah, they're festooned with really bad paper. You know, the old approach to dealing with a bank like this is to break in into two, a good and a bad bank. I think in Citibank's situation, we're going to have to break it up into a bad bank and a worse bank.
Host: You're talking about its decision to split off Smith Barney.
Guest: More than just split Barney; they're now talking about taking all of the bad paper and all of the risky assets that they paid way too much for and is dragging them down and putting that into a separate entity.
Host: So, will we, taxpayers, will we get anything out of this?
Guest: Other than the ongoing headache? I don't think a whole lot. If you look at - let's take a look at the Citigroup purchase first. You know, it's $45 billion in capitalization, which is taxpayer money going to Citigroup at a time when its value was only $25 billion. From a purely investment standpoint, what is the taxpayer getting for their dollars?
Host: Well, I suppose a lot...
Guest: These are horrific investments.
Host: I suppose lawmakers would say we're averting a financial collapse.
Guest: Well, if that - you know, if the point is to avert a financial collapse, then the thing to do is to go onto these companies and affect an orderly liquidation. If you look at what we did correct with Bear Stearns, essentially that was a single-party-acquirer bankruptcy proceeding, where the Fed came in and they, in a very orderly fashion, said, we're going to transfer all these assets to this buyer. We're going to basically wipe out the shareholders. They threw them a couple of bucks, $10, and that was that. But essentially, you do this on an orderly fashion, instead of just, you know, we just doubled down with Bank of America the way we doubled down with Citibank. We're throwing good money after bad and all for the greater good of maintaining three giant behemoth banks: Bank of America, Citi and JPMorgan Chase.
Host: Barry Ritholtz writes the business blog called The Big Picture. He's also a financial analyst. Barry, thank you.
Guest: My pleasure.
Host: There's more coming up on Day to Day from NPR News.