Host: Now for another listener favorite, my interview with R&B singer Chante Moore. Moore's latest CD "Love the Woman," is her first solo album in eight years. She's been focusing on gospel music in this latest effort. As Chante will tell you the church is in her blood, and that's the first thing that I asked her, how does she straddle the religious and the secular?
Guest: Because it's not two worlds to me. I don't even think about it like that. Keeping my integrity is what I think about it. You just do your job and you do it well, and you keep your integrity. And I don't sing anything I wouldn't be able to sing in front of my children. I don't sing anything I wouldn't be able to sing in front of my pastor. People fall in love whether you're, you know, at the church or if you're in the club. You do fall in love the same way - the feelings, the emotions, the things that it brings from the inside of who you are, it's the same. And I want to be sure that I sing about love and not sex.
Host: Let me talk about that with you for a moment because that's a really fine line, isn't it?
Guest: It is in that I think people blur the lines of what's OK to say. I believe the line is very clear.
Host: Really?
Guest: It's very clear.
Host: Even in your CD, this new one that you have, which is "Love the Woman," and the photograph of you on the cover which is, you know, very lovely, but it suggest to me and I'm not a... You know, I'm not a bible thumping person at all, but it would suggest to me that there are some churches in America where that picture of you on the cover would be trouble.
Guest: (Laughing) Yeah. Well, I wouldn't wear that to church, that is true. But, that really is the bigger struggle for me than anything, is what I wear.
Host: Really?
Guest: Absolutely. What I sing is easy.
Host: Why is that?
Guest: You can sing about love all day long and have a really pretty voice, and have a sexy quote unquote "sexy voice," but not sing about sex and still emote those kind of feelings. (Singing) Do you feel what I feel When you kiss me like that. I'm not sure if it's love. I just know you (unintelligible) And it feels like ooohh la la la la...
Host: And listening to this, and I've listened to it several times, you - well, let me put it this way, when you listen to the whole thing, how does it feel to you?
Guest: (Laughing) Well, it's one of my favorite things to do is to listen to my record before it comes out. That's the first thing because it's before the judgment calls have come, and I tell you, I enjoyed listening to this record so much. (Singing) Do you remember the last time we shared a laugh It seems like forever 'cause now I hardly ever see you smile I've never been the fool to think love don't cost a little pain I don't think it's suppose to be this hard, Ooh, to get along, to get along...
Host: "It Ain't Suppose to be this Way," is the song that is the song that is the one you hear when you click on your Web site. Is that because that's the one you guys want to push?
Guest: I felt like it was a good balance of the R&B and the jazz connection between both sides because I think if we went with "First Kiss," which I absolutely love too, it would have lent it more to the jazz side of the album, and the R&B crowd might not have come to it with the awareness that it's more R&B stuff on there also. (Singing) Don't say a word as I kiss in(ph). Don't say a word baby Boy, don't try denying what the passion makes you do Oohh...
Host: I'm going to switch gears a little bit...
Guest: OK.
Host: And talk about Chante Moore a little more personally, if that's OK with you because you - I read a quote of yours and I want to read it to you.
Guest: OK.
Host: And see what you - see what you meant by it.
Guest: OK.
Host: Here it is, "I think that's what I was put here to do. Talk about my own life and my own views. I like to be able to expose my experiences so that people know they are not alone." Do you remember saying that?
Guest: Yes, absolutely.
Host: What do you mean?
Guest: Well, I've been through a lot. People don't like talking about things that hurt. Usually we like to skip over that stuff because it brings up something that's unpleasant, but honestly it's the only way that I feel like some of those things have purpose because of somebody else's journey. And I really believe, you know, the quote from the Scriptures that says, all things work together for my good. All things work together for my good, not just the stuff I liked, not just the stuff that felt really great in the highs in my life that were wonderful, even not selling records has worked for my good because my ego is not in a place where you can't be in the same room with me and fit. I'm not in a place that when I see an unwed mother at 17, that I go, she probably didn't have no mama that cared about her. I had a mama that cared and I could have been that girl. And because of knowing that it could have been me, when I see them the emphatically in heart is different than somebody else's who doesn't know what it's like to be that girl whose been manipulated and her innocence stolen from her. It was stolen from me, and I know what that feels like. And you feel by yourself, you feel damaged goods.
Host: Your innocence was stolen from you?
Guest: Stolen, yeah. It happens to so many women - black, white, yellow, orange, green whatever it is. We all been in places where we've been victimized in some kind of way, usually.
Host: Out of respect, I don't want to go there, out of curiosity I do. How much are you willing to tell us about how your innocence was stolen from you?
Guest: Well, growing up in a Christian family, you would have thought what happened to me would never happen because my mother loved me and she was very much aware of who I am, but I was a very mature little girl. And at 14, I was allowed to have a crush on a man who was 21. And because he was worldly, and had money, and he'd been in the Navy, you know, and I was, like, all little girls seek older men and we go, Oh my God, he's so cute. Oh my God, oh my God, oh my God. Well, somehow in there my father wasn't watching, my mother was watching very closely and thought she could handle the situation and she allowed this relationship to happen. It should not have happened. I should not have been allowed to date a man, it made me have insecurities at an early age that I should never have had, but a man who could manipulate a little girl's mind and her heart. He was allowed to do things he shouldn't have done.
Host: You have daughters?
Guest: I have one daughter.
Host: That will not happen to her.
Guest: She will not be allowed to do that. She can have the crush because you can't stop a heart from beating. You can't stop them from going, oh my god, oh, my god, I love him. That's beautiful, but no man's going to walk up in my house and steal my baby. That's not going to happen.
Host: That was R&B singer Chante Moore. She joined from the studios of NPR west. Moore's latest CD "Love the Woman," is in stores now. That's our show for today. Glad you could join us. To listen to the show or subscribe to the podcast, visit our website nprnewsandnotes.org. To join the conversation or sign up for the newsletter visit our blog at nprnewsandviews.org.