Host: Also watching the congressional hearings on the Big Three bailout today is Gary Watson. He's a retired auto worker, and he joins us now by phone from a UAW hall in Lansing, Michigan. Welcome to the program, Mr. Watson. And can you give us a sense of what the mood is like there?
Guest: Well, I think everybody is kind of on pins and needles to see what's going to come out of it, see what direction Congress is going to go.
Host: The union recently made certain concessions to help cut costs on their end, including suspending the job bank program, and that's a program where UAW workers can receive nearly full pay for up to two years if their jobs are eliminated. Why make sacrifices like that?
Guest: Well, I think the union has been a partner ion this thing. In fact, I was one to help negotiate the jobs bank originally, so I pretty well understand that program. But, if we can turn this thing around, we can keep those working that are there today, so there may not be a need for it.
Host: Of course, any proposed changes would have to be ratified by union members. What do you think the chances are there that these changes would be approved?
Guest: I think they have put a scare into people enough that they'd approve almost anything, and that's unfortunate. But I think we rely on our leadership. Cal Rapson, who is our vice president, has been in General Motors his entire life. I worked with Cal when I was here as a president. I think he understands the needs of auto workers, understands what GM can do and what they can't do, and I think, if we follow his leadership along with Ron Getelfinger, we're not going to be in too bad a shape.
Host: You worked at a GM plant for 32 years. What you're seeing right now, how does that compare to what you've seen in the past? There have been troubled times before.
Guest: Never have seen anything to this magnitude. Well, my local has gone from 14,000 members to 2,000. When I was here, we were worrying about what was our next product, not worrying about whether we were going to have a product.
Host: And so, for some of the workers that are there now with you at this UAW hall currently employed, what are they talking about? Are they coming up with a plan B in case this doesn't happen and they don't have jobs?
Guest: I don't think anybody at this point is going to panic to that degree. I think Congress has to come across with something that's going to solve and save the auto industry. I read an article the other day where it says, you know, the auto industry pays about $156 billion in taxes a year. You can loan somebody 36 billion and get a 156 billion back. That's not a bad investment.
Host: Some might see it that way. Some look at other numbers and are a little less sympathetic to the auto industry. Sometimes, people are critical. They say that union auto workers are paid too much. What, from your perspective, would you tell people who have that opinion, who say, look, guys working for Toyota don't get nearly as much in benefits. You guys should give up some more.
Guest: You can only get what you can negotiate from a company, and a company has to have something for you to negotiate it from, and that's basically how we got where we are today. We happen to work for three companies that were far and above - probably most companies in America pay their CEOs huge profits, huge wages. And, you know, we only negotiate our share of that. Now, if we have to give our share back to save that company, I guess that's something we've got to do, you know. I guess America has to decide if they want an American auto business here in America, or if they want to rely on China to fight a war in the event we have to go to one.
Host: I'm curious, Mr. Watson. Personally, what's at stake for you? You, I'm sure, still receive benefits from GM. Are you possibly sacrificing some things here, and what would that mean for you?
Guest: Well, yeah. We've had to pay co-pays on our insurance, which we didn't have to originally. I'm sure, you know, we would have got increases in our pensions had this not happened, if the corporations were continuing to make huge sums of money. So, yeah. I think everybody's ponying up a little bit. And, you know, if you take a little from here and a little from there, eventually, you got a lot.
Host: Gary Watson is a retired auto worker. He spoke to us on the phone from a UAW hall in Lansing, Michigan. Thank you, Mr. Watson.
Guest: You're welcome.