Host: From NPR News, this is News & Notes. I'm Farai Chideya. It's Uncle Sam to the rescue, but what is the long-term fallout for your mortgage or your community? We're talking about an unprecedented takeover. The federal government has seized the reigns of mortgage giants Freddy Mac and Fannie Mae. Together the companies hold nearly half of the country's mortgages. And here to break down the bailout and other economic news we've got Keith Reed. He's a business reporter for the Cincinnati Enquirer, and he blogs for BET's finance page, Dollar Out Of 15 Cents. Keith, how are you?
Guest: How you doing, Farai?
Host: Good. Now give me a really quick hit on what these two entities are and how they've worked with the government until now?
Guest: Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac are basically publicly traded companies that have been backed by the government for some time. And their mission is basically to keep fluidity in the mortgage market by buying mortgages from banks, thus allowing them to continue to lend money to people who need to borrow money to buy a house. In other words, if I'm a bank, I know that if I - excuse me - if I give you a mortgage,. Fannie and Freddy will buy that mortgage from me and thus I'll get cash that I can then lend out to somebody else. So that's what Fannie and Freddy's mission has always been.
Host: So what prompted this bailout? And what's it going to do for people on the ground? Not just people in the government and people in business?
Guest: Well what prompted the bailout - well initially, this kind of goes back to about a year. Fannie and Freddy have lost about 14 billion dollars over the last year. Again, these are publicly traded companies so shareholders have been worried about the companies for a while. But the bigger impact on the national economy is really what prompted the bailout. When you take a look at the fact that Fannie and Freddy actually purchased about half the nation's mortgages, that can have a huge impact if that company fails on the national economy. What happened over this past weekend was that the Treasury actually discovered that some accounting irregularities in the books of Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac to make it - that made it look like their books were actually stronger than they were, when in fact their books were weaker. Their financials were a lot weaker than anyone suspected. And the federal government stepped in to take over both of those entities.
Host: So when you think about -particularly African-American neighborhoods you've got a lot of neighborhoods - and you know not just black neighborhoods where you'll see for sale signs. Sometimes now you are starting to see abandoned houses. We've even heard stories about how abandoned houses then produce crime, because people will base out of those houses. Is this going to really help people at the grassroots level?
Guest: It's going to help some people at the grassroots level. As with anything in the economy, it's going to take a long time or at least some months for the real fallout from this to be known. What it does mean in the immediate term is that some banks will be able to lend more money, again, because Fannie and Freddy is going to get a cash infusion from the government to continue their work of buying mortgages from the banks, and so that should ease up credit. It should also make it potentially a little bit easier and a little bit cheaper to borrow because banks- when they're not taking as much risk then they can lower some mortgage rates things like that. I don't know that it's necessarily going to clean up any neighborhood where you've got people going into an abandoned house and free basing or selling drugs or, you know, abandoned houses, that sort of thing. I don't know that this move is going to have that immediate impact on the ground in neighborhoods that are already blighted.
Host: What about at this upper level? What about what's happened in the stock markets and in the international communities? The ramifications of this?
Guest: Well actually, there's two sort of interesting or almost ironic impacts from this. Investors broadly, both in the U.S. and around the world, are happy about this. Again, because the federal backing - or the federal takeover of Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac brings a little bit - brings some liquidity back to the U.S. lending markets. Will also bring - bring some- it will make that mortgage market a little bit more solid and give some clarity to what might happen to the housing picture over the next, say, you know, 12 to 18 months and going from there. But individual investors - I talked to a friend of mine up in Boston this morning who owns shares of Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac are not going to be happy, because they are going to be in a position where, you know, these stocks have lost a ton of value. The hit that they're taking on the equities markets because of the government takeover, because of the fact that they've lost 14 billion, because of the accounting irregularities. If you are actually an investor who's a shareholder of Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac, you are probably not too happy right now.
Host: All right. Let's turn to something else that isn't going to make people happy. We're talking about the unemployment rate. Five-year high, 6.1 percent overall. More than 10 percent for African-Americans. What does this bad news do to the economy in addition to obviously hurting people on a very real, very personal level?
Guest: I think it's a result of what we've already seen in the economy more so than a cause. I mean, when you start to get into these economic cycles, the economy sort of goes into a tailspin where low productivity, where higher interest rates, where mortgages aren't being made. Those things start to begat lesser investments by companies, which begets lower wages, which begets inflation, which begets higher unemployment. And the cycle starts to repeat, because then when you have higher unemployment, people can't buy, then they can't borrow, then they can't purchase houses, they can't build. That sort of thing. I think we're just sort of in the middle of that swirling, circling kind of - to use an unfortunate sort of hurricane kind of analogy. We're in the middle. We're sort of at the eye of the storm where all of these things are just swirling around each other and we're not sure when any one of them is going to show enough signs of life to make that stop.
Host: When you think about - I mean, and you wear a couple of different hats, obviously, you know, the micro and the macro. What is it that really will allow people in certain job markets, where there just aren't a lot of jobs, to thrive? What kind of advice would you give if you had a buddy who had lost a job and obviously things are tight and there's not a lot of folks in some communities. In others it's different. But in some communities, not a lot of folks even have jobs to give out.
Guest: I think there's always an opportunity. I mean, if you want to look at the silver lining, whenever the economy goes into a tailspin, you do see an uptake in entrepreneurship. And clearly, for an entrepreneur trying to start in this market where it's difficult to borrow, and where a lot of people don't have the kinds of savings that they need, that is going to be a particularly tough path. But you do see in cycles of economic downturn when more people are losing jobs, you do start to see more business creation, if not job creation. And I think we'll start to see the impact of that maybe four or five years down the road. Some of the other things that people may consider, I mean, if you don't - if you're in a market with -where jobs are tight, you may want to consider going back and getting some training. Starting to look at some of the areas of the economy that we're going to see burgeoning green technologies - those sorts of things. Green technology, biomedical technologies, those sorts of pursuits are still going to be very much popular and still going to be in need over the next 10 to 20 years. So people are going to go back to training. So I think - those are the types of - that is the type of advice I would give to people if they are out there looking for a job right now and can't find one.
Host: So Keith, you know, one of the stories that we tracked over the last week, obviously politics was the big story, but also we had Hurricane Gustav, and we spoke with a woman named Thena Robinson. She was just one of the many people who were on the move. Now those people are returning. When you think about the economic ramifications, what kinds of things do communities that are just lifting up again need to think about in terms of infrastructure, and what do individuals need to think about?
Guest: In terms of a community, when you've got some of the devastation that a hurricane can bring, you're looking at first an initial ground response. You're talking about the grim task of maybe rescue and recovery that we saw go on for a couple of weeks during Katrina. Then after you get to that point, when you're beyond rescue and recovery, you're talking about the cost of getting basic services to people, people who have survived and who are returning, they need food, they need water, they need electricity, they need basic transportation. They need a way to make ends meet until their jobs re-open. Over the long term, then you're talking about, depending on the level and extent of the damage, then you have to take into consideration what happens to individual families' wages and costs of living. I think again back to Katrina, what happened in New Orleans, if you spent any time down there you would see that many of the apartments that didn't used to cost as much - meaning the housing units that didn't cost as much pre-hurricane - skyrocketed because there had been so much damage done so there weren't so many places to live, and supply and demand dictated that. Insurance companies didn't want to - didn't want to pay the claims that many people filed, and people had paid for years these - into their premiums on their policies. So you do have a lot of rebuilding, and of course, that's going to be commensurate with the level of damage that's done by any particular storm.
Host: There are a lot of people who've just barely recovered from Hurricane Katrina. Now they have got to face additional cost from Gustav, if only the cost of evacuating and returning and not being able to work. There was a lot of talk about what insurance did and didn't do. Do you have any suggestions on how people in hurricane zones should look at insurance or other factors that might help them looking forward?
Guest: Unfortunately, in many cases it may be too late. I mean, if you were to go back three years, I would tell anybody to get the maximum coverage that you can afford, because what we've seen is that many insurance companies - or many of the insured in those areas didn't carry the kinds of riders that they needed. So you may have had a house that was destroyed by a flood, and discovered that your hurricane insurance policy only covered wind damage but didn't have a rider for flood damage. So that would be number one. The reason why I would say it may be too late to do that is that even in a case where someone could now afford the maximum premiums for all the riders that they need to take care of their property in the event of a storm, is that many of these insurance companies have simply stopped writing the kinds of policies that people really need to be protected. They took so many losses in the insurance business with Hurricanes Katrina and Rita - this is going to be - appears to be another big season for storms, and we're not out of the woods yet, there is another one bearing down potentially on Florida and the Gulf - that many of these insurance companies simply stopped writing policies for hurricanes that can protect people who live in these areas.
Host: Very quickly, if you're in an area that doesn't seem to get severe weather, should you pay attention to severe weather policies? Quickly.
Guest: Yeah, you should. Just because you don't live in a hurricane zone doesn't mean that severe weather isn't possible. You can get snow damage, wind damage, tornado damage, rain damage, flood damage. Weather is unpredictable, and you should absolutely make sure that you're covered to the maximum that you need to be in your area.
Host: Keith, always great to talk to you. Thanks.
Guest: Always a pleasure. Thanks.
Host: That's News & Notes contributor Keith Reed. He is a business reporter for the Cincinnati Enquirer.