Host: Now that you've heard our bloggers' opinions on the GOP's nominating convention, let's hear what you are saying on our blog, nprnewsandviews.org. I'm joined now by Geoffrey Bennett, the web producer for News & Notes. Hey, Geoff.
Guest: Hey, Tony.
Host: So, what is the take? You heard what the bloggers have been saying.
Guest: Right.
Host: What are our people saying?
Guest: Well, it ranges from excitement to outrage. A reader named Bill wrote in our blog, very surprising. I'm not even a McCain supporter, but I admire his guts in choosing this woman. I'm excited by the fact that either we'll have our first woman VP, or our first black president. I'm really proud of my country right now. To which a reader named Joe replied, proud of my country? How can you be proud of a calculated political pick designed simply out of desperation to appeal to Hillary supporters? So, that serves as some indication of the intensity surrounding the Republican ticket right now.
Host: Some people were concerned that the GOP would lose out to coverage of Hurricane Gustav. Has that been the case online?
Guest: Well, yesterday it was according to the website Blog Pulse Trends, which monitors blogs, and message boards, and news groups. Yesterday most people online were focused on Hurricane Gustav, then Sarah Palin, then John McCain, in that order. But over night though, the focus switched to Palin's out in front in terms of web prominence right now, followed by the hurricane, and then John McCain himself. So, if John McCain was looking to get some attention by picking Sarah Palin, he definitely got his wish.
Host: And what can folks find on our blog today?
Guest: Well, we've got more about that new report that shows the number of black delegates at its lowest point since 1968. We have a series of blog posts from Farai, who's blogging from the RNC. And we have another installment of Speak Your Mind. It's our series that allows our readers to write about whatever issues they choose. So, people should check that out on our blog.
Host: All right. Thanks a lot, Geoff.
Guest: Thank you.
Host: Geoffrey Bennett is the web producer for News & Notes. He joined me from the studios of NPR West.