Host: This is News & Notes, I'm Farai Chideya. Few people want to talk about the possible assassination of Senator Barack Obama. But when you go to our blog, you'll see that one of political contributors tackled the issue head on. Geoffrey Bennett is the web producer for News & Notes, and he's here with more. Hey, Geoff.
Guest: Hey, Farai.
Host: So this is a huge question a lot of people have. And one of our guest bloggers wrote about it. Tell us a little bit about it.
Guest: James L. Taylor (ph), he's a political scientist who's a friend of the show, wrote a piece for us on our blog about how the tenor of the current political climate poses a specific danger for Obama. Taylor says, "The right's rage against Obama has bordered on fanatical, and the dye may have been cast regrettably by Hillary Clinton's defeated campaign, which provided the blueprint that the McCain-Palin ticket is currently following." And he goes on to draw comparisons between fiery rhetoric and the attempts on JFK, MLK, and even Benazir Bhutto, the slain Pakistani politician. So here's what a few of our readers had to say. Zion Massai (ph) writes, "God forbid, but this is the climate that exists at present. The schizophrenic McCain campaign acts as if it did not facilitate a lynch mob mentality among its followers." And Kedar Coleman (ph) writes, "So true. During the primaries, Hillary supporters, the Liberal white left and Democratic strategists all played to varying degrees, the fear of a black planet game." So people are continuing to talk about that in our blog.
Host: Absolutely. Well, staying with Obama for a minute, there was a very prominent typo on early election ballots in upstate New York. So what was that about? What are folks saying?
Guest: Prominent is a good word for it. Obama's last name was misspelled Osama on about 300 ballots, as you said. The county's chairman, who's a Democrat, said that it was a mistake. New ballots were mailed out. But on our blog, folks weren't so sure that it was just a simple mistake. Moji Oderinde (ph), who's a frequent commenter, says "I find it hard to believe that this is a mistake and that it was unintentional. The s and b key strokes on the keyboard are too far apart to justify such a mistake." So it's yet another developing controversy
Host: Absolutely. Well, all right politics isn't everything. It just seems like it sometimes. So what else is going on?
Guest: Magic Johnson found himself in the center of news again, unwillingly. As most people know, he retired from the NBA after contracting the HIV. But two Minneapolis radio hosts had some fun at his expense. So here's a clip of that. Unidentified Radio Host #1: What about diseases that are eminently treatable and you can live with for a long, long time quite healthily if you just get some drugs. Unidentified Radio Host #2: Like Magic Johnson. Like Magic with his faked AIDS. Unidentified Radio Host #2: Magic faked AIDS. Unidentified Radio Host #1: You think Magic faked AIDS for sympathy? Unidentified Radio Host #2: I'm convinced that Magic faked AIDS. Unidentified Radio Host #1: Yeah, me too. Unidentified Radio Host #2: It falls apart when you get into motivation. I'm not sure why, but I'm pretty sure he faked AIDS. Unidentified Radio Host #1: I've got an email here from... Unidentified Radio Host #2: He's the only cured AIDS guy ever. Well now. So Johnson released a statement saying he was, quote, extremely disappointed, and a reader named Ron Mwangaguhunga (ph) wrote in our blog, "Not funny. It's been my experience as a blogger in NYC for five years that there are only two comedic topics that are off limits. AIDS and child abuse.
Host: On that note, Geoff, always something going on, on the blog. Thank you so much.
Guest: Thank you.
Host: Geoffrey Bennett is the web producer for News & Notes. He joined me from the studios of NPR West.