Host: This is Day to Day. I'm Madeleine Brand. Coming up, I speak with Iranian author Azar Nafisi. She wrote the bestseller "Reading Lolita in Tehran." She has a new memoir out, and it is frank and surprising. First, though, let us talk retail. Stores are still offering big discounts hoping to get unsold holiday merchandise off the shelves. Retail analyst Howard Davidowitz is back with us. He's a Day to Day regular. Hi, Howard.
Guest: Hello.
Host: Well, the numbers aren't in yet, but everyone is predicting that this was at best a lackluster season. How bad was it?
Guest: It was the worst season in 50 years. We're going to have negative GDP growth of five to six, but we're going to have negative GDP growth every quarter of next year. When you look at this quarter, the consumer is 70 percent of GDP. That leaves retailing down five at least. It's horrendous, it's terrible and it all comes back to the consumer. Fourteen trillion in debt, a 101k instead of a 401k, exploding unemployment accelerating; we'll lose another half a million jobs this month; that'll bring it to 2.5 million jobs; unemployment goes to 10 percent by December of '09. So, the consumer is just devastated. An $8 trillion negative wealth effect from housing; consumer bankruptcy is dramatically on the rise, consumers falling behind on their credit card bills, their auto loans, their student loans, their home loans. The consumer is completely inundated, and nothing good is going to happen in the near term.
Host: OK, so maybe I was understating it a bit when I said lackluster. Where did you get that 10-percent unemployment rate?
Guest: That is the forecast of our firm. Our firm is forecasting 10 percent unemployment by December of '09. Here are the bulletproof facts: Unemployment has exploded in the last four months dramatically. We now have lost 1.9 million jobs. This month, we'll lose a half a million jobs. That'll bring it to 2.4 million jobs lost. That'll bring your unemployment to about 6.9. Our forecast is for 10 percent by December of '09, but that doesn't include millions of people on part-time work that want full-time work; it doesn't include the people who've dropped out of the labor force. When you look at those numbers, you're then looking at 14 percent unemployment. The word depression is not off the table. The worst is yet to come, and we think the Obama plan will do very little - do more negative than plus. So, we don't really see anything good happening.
Host: OK. Well, I'm going to try to wrest some bright spots from you. Online, it did fairly well. Amazon said this was their best holiday season ever.
Guest: Let's talk about online. It really did not do well. Amazon clearly is best in class, and they did OK. Interestingly enough, they didn't give out any sales numbers. I'm a little suspicious about that. I'm sure Amazon did OK, but let's look at the online sector. For five years, they've increased at the rate of 20-to-25 percent and clearly are the strongest sector in the retail space. However, this quarter, they will be flat to down one percent as a sector, still better than everything else, but I would say, when you've got a trend and when you're up 20 to 25 and you're flat to down one, that doesn't look too good to me. Now, there are winners out there, of course. The consumer is trading down. So, we've closed 600 Starbucks stores, and Mrs. Fields Cookies is in bankruptcy; Ponderosa is in bankruptcy; Steak & Ale liquidated; Bennigan's liquated; casual bonding terrible. But McDonalds hitting the ball out of the park, because it's cheap and good: coffee, $2 less than Starbucks. They're winning. Family Dollar, winning. It's Wal-Mart time; they're winning. Dollar Tree, winning. The consumer doesn't have money so they are dramatically trading down.
Host: Retail analyst Howard Davidowitz, thank you.
Guest: Thank you for the invite.
Host: There's more to come on Day to Day from NPR News.