Host: Today, Democratic officials are saying Leon Panetta will be President-elect Barack Obama's new head of the CIA. Joining us now to talk about this pick and what else is going on in the world of politics is NPR senior editor Ron Elving. Hi, Ron.
Guest: Good to be with you, Alex.
Host: Good to hear from you, as well. Leon Panetta was once chief of staff for President Bill Clinton's White House. Why does this appointment make sense?
Guest: This appointment would make sense from the standpoint of a president, a new president, Barack Obama, wanting to assert a kind of White House control over the intelligence community. Now, Leon Panetta is not part of the intelligence community. He has had no experience with the intelligence community except as an outside observer, critic, and as one of the authors of a 2006 report on what went wrong with respect to 9/11 and also with respect to the Iraq weapons of mass destruction intelligence. So Leon Panetta is not of the CIA. He is coming in as kind of a total outsider but somebody who has very strong confidence among not only the Barack Obama people, but also the Clinton people who are going to be at the Department of State under Hillary Clinton.
Host: There's also word today about a choice for the post of national intelligence director, retired Admiral Dennis Blair. What can you tell us about him?
Guest: Dennis Blair has been in the Navy and in the U.S. government for 34 years. He also worked in the White House during his long Navy career and before he was named by Barack Obama to take over this director of national intelligence job. This will actually be Leon Panetta's boss. He is in charge of the total U.S. intelligence community, all 16 agencies, CIA, the defense agencies, and so on.
Host: The president elect will need to pick someone else to become commerce secretary. New Mexico Governor Bill Richardson took himself out of the running because of an investigation into how some of his donors won a lucrative contract. How serious a problem is this withdrawal for the Obama transition team?
Guest: Much less of a problem than they would have had had some of this come to light or if the seriousness of this grand jury investigation and the length of it had come to light after Bill Richardson had become secretary of commerce. So it's much easier to replace someone who is an appointee than someone who's already in the job, and there are a number of other people, quite a long list, many of them quite distinguished, who can step into this role, and I suspect we'll see a name this week.
Host: Ron, let's turn now to the Senate. Roland Burris of Illinois, who was tapped by Rod Blagojevich, says he'll show up at the Senate door even though Senate leaders have said they won't seat him. So what's going to happen there?
Guest: At midday on Tuesday, unless something is worked out in advance, Roland Burris will come and attempt to present his credentials to the Senate to be seated along with the other new members who have just been elected in the November elections and some appointees since then. That will not happen. The Senate will not seat Roland Burris tomorrow, barring some major change of heart on the part of the Senate Democratic leaders. They feel that, as they had said back in December, that anyone appointed by Rod Blagojevich, who was, of course, accused of holding a kind of auction for this Senate seat to the highest bidder, anyone appointed by that governor would not be acceptable to them. And they haven't changed their minds even though they have said repeatedly they have no objection to Roland Burris in particular to take that job. So one assumes that they will stand by that tomorrow and that Burris's appointment, that is to say his seating, will be delayed probably for a matter of several weeks.
Host: Very briefly, Ron, the latest in the impeachment proceedings against Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich, where do they stand?
Guest: State House committee on impeachment today reviewing a 54-page document reviewing all the accusations against Rod Blagojevich. We expect them to vote on impeachment this week, probably Friday.
Host: NPR senior Washington editor Ron Elving, thanks, Ron.
Guest: Thank you, Alex.