Host: And now, it's letter time. Our editor, Sasa Woodruff, is here with me. Hey, Sasa.
Guest: Hey, Tony. It's good to have you back in the studio. How are you doing?
Host: I'm doing great, thank you very much. I understand we got some letters about an interview we did with a man who was struggling to look for work, James Smith.
Guest: That's right. Rachel Carpenter in Philadelphia sent us these thoughts about the interview: It was very moving to hear the struggle, honesty, perseverance in that man's voice, as well as the strength. I am sure I'm not the only listener who hopes Jim Smith knows the value of those qualities.
Host: Now, Drew Too, that's T-O-O, in Georgia wrote us this after he heard the interview: I wanted to say how heart-wrenching I found the interview with James Smith and how deeply it moved me. I am in a similar situation for not so different reasons. It is disturbing that someone who has served his country is having to consider leaving it just to put food in his mouth. His actual criminal background is preventing employers from giving him an opportunity to make amends for his past criminal activity. My heart goes out to Mr. Smith and to the millions of other newly or soon-to-be newly unemployed people in this country.
Guest: Then, we got some comments about a bloggers' roundtable about the Canadian Supreme Court ruling that says Canadian airlines must offer an extra seat to obese passengers. Diaprey Kukoo Siemens(ph) in New Delhi wrote us this: While I agree that all passengers have the right to comfortable seating, I disagree that overweight fliers should be offered a free second seat. The reality is that seats and legroom in cattle class have been shrinking for years, as have an array of services like snacks, blankets and luggage allowance. Consumer rights have eroded and we could all use a decent seat on the plane.
Host: And Stacey Michael sent us this: My husband and I found ourselves agreeing with all the commentators but wishing someone would offer a creative solution. Comfort is all very well for the obese passenger, but what about the slender one crammed into the corner of the seat next to him or her?
Guest: And finally, Valerie Evans in Nevada, California wrote in after she heard the interview we did with Republican Michael Steele about wanting to lead the Republican National Committee. She wrote: I caught the Michael Steele interview the other night. What a refreshing voice for the Republican Party. Had Steele ran against Obama, I would have had a hard time choosing. As an African-American who was a closet Republican, I became disillusioned with the party during the first Bush administration. It was easy the second time around to switch parties. And that's it for letters. Thanks for writing, and please keep your comments coming.
Host: Now NPR has a new way to chime in on our stories. Go to our program page at nprnewsandnotes.org and click on a segment. There, you can click on the Comments link and write us your thoughts.
Guest: And you could still send us your gripes and praises by logging onto npr.org and clicking on Contact Us. Be sure to tell us where you're writing from and how to pronounce your name.
Host: Thanks, Sasa.
Guest: No problem.
Host: That's our show for today. Thanks for sharing your time with us. To listen to the show or subscribe to the podcast, visit our Web site, nprnewsandnotes.org. To join the conversation or sign up for the newsletter, visit our blog at nprnewsandviews.org. News & Notes was created by NPR News and the African-American Public Radio Consortium. Tomorrow, is America really a melting pot of cultures but do differences keep us apart? We'll kick off our month-long series on the state of multi-culturalism in the U.S. I'm Tony Cox, in for Farai Chideya. This is News & Notes.