Guest: It's fundamentally prices got out of line with people's income during the big real estate booms that we had recently. So the market is correcting and kind of getting back to a level where houses are priced at levels that people can afford without exotic financing or lying about their income or all the other kinds of excesses that went on in the past few years that I think a lot of us are familiar with now. So what do these numbers here in Southern California, what does that mean for the rest of the country? You know the other kind of metro coastal areas are following a pretty similar pattern. But you know places like Charlotte, North Carolina haven't - places that haven't had the kind of run up that we had in the hot spots probably aren't seeing as large declines because they don't have this part of fall. But the real sort of disaster areas are California and Nevada, Arizona, Florida. You know, New York City has had great appreciation and hasn't seen the large declines now. So that sort of the one the economists are watching next to see, you know, if New York's bubble is - which is sort of been slowly deflating is really going to have a big burst at some point. Foreclosure seems to be playing a big role in all of this. A new study came out yesterday from the company Realty Track showing that across the country fewer Americans are thinking about buying a foreclosed home. So what might be the effect of this? Here in southern California people are buying foreclosed homes, especially ones that are sort of decent quality. I understand that you are currently speaking to us from a home that was foreclosed on. Can you tell us a little about your situation there? Well the house that I bought that closed in October had been foreclosed in the summer. And I had sold the place I was living in, in 2005 and rented you know until this year because I sort of thought the housing bubble was going to burst. And even though prices probably will continue to go down, we were kind of tired of living in a rental house that didn't have air conditioning or a dishwater, things - sort of niceties like that. And it looked like you know the only kind of reasonable deals when I was shopping for a house back in summer were foreclosures. For those looking to avoid foreclosure, there is a federal program out there and it was designed to help, they estimated 400,000 borrowers avoid foreclosure and so far they've only received about 300 applications. The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development has said this programs way to onerous, way too expensive. Are there any plans afoot to help homeowners in a different way? Yes, I think the Obama administration and the new Congress is going to be far more aggressive in attacking housing. At least they've been saying that and there were a few proposals that Democrats in Congress were not able to get passed that may welcome to life in the New Year. And probably the most prominent one would be allowing bankruptcy judges to order lenders in bankruptcy court to reduce the principal amount for mortgages so that would help someone who maybe owes more on their house than what it's worth to get a better deal to staying in their house from their bank. Peter Hong writes about real estate for the Los Angeles Times. Thank you, Peter. Thank you.