Host: For a closer look now at how the vote is breaking down in Pennsylvania, we turn to Dennis Roddy. He's a reporter for the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, and he has a piece up at slate.com where he says political science is wasted in Pennsylvania because it is such a balkanized state.
Guest: It's a tremendous number of markets. First of all, it's five or six media markets. It's a New-York-oriented market. It's a New-Jersey-oriented market. It's Philadelphia. It's southern York County, whose - many of whose residents commute to the Washington beltway for work. It's a whole bunch of different places, and those different places are different culturally in many respects.
Host: But Pennsylvania has gone Democratic in the last several elections, in the presidential elections, and so, why can't it be considered reliably Democratic now?
Guest: Well, you've got to keep something in mind, though, that since 1968, when it went for Humphrey, Pennsylvania has, with the exception of the last cycle, gone with the majority vote winner, with the rest of the nation. So, if McCain were to swing this thing around, Pennsylvania would be the canary in the coal mine. You'd start noticing it in Pennsylvania, and in part, that is why McCain's campaign has concentrated so very heavily on this state because this still is a state where elections are as much about changing minds as they are about reading them.
Host: Well, let's talk about the western part of the state. Now, this is the part of the state that Hillary Clinton won handily, actually gave her the victory in the primaries. And this is a state with a lot of blue-collar, Catholic, union Democrats.
Guest: Yes, yes indeed, yeah.
Host: Where are they now?
Guest: They're blue-collar, and many of them remain Democrats, although when the national election comes, many of them outside of Allegheny County do start voting Republican. Part of the reason is that this is an older state, and for pensioners, unless the economy is really going haywire and frightening them about the condition of their pensions and the future of their Social Security, they are going to worry less about breadbasket issues than they're going to worry about the social flashpoint issues. And out here, Democrats, and we're talking about liberals, Democrats are pro-Second Amendment. They're pro-life. They are very religious. They're socially conservative. Gay marriage simply confounds them as a theory. In other words, we're talking about a place where the liberals have guns.
Host: And so, where are those liberals going? Are they going to Obama or McCain?
Guest: Well, economic liberals who are strongly social conservatives and older, in rural Pennsylvania, in the counties outside of Allegheny in the west, many of them are being tempted by John McCain. Many of them find a certain commonality, both with his military experience and with his message overall. Some of them I do hear talking about Obama. I did have my first-ever encounter with a voter who had Jack Murtha signs up in the front of her yard, who is a lifelong Democrat, who asked me to turn off my tape recorder and then said, I think that if Obama wins, he's going to enslave the white people. So, you've got a really, really disparate selection of people. Is she characteristic of the area? No, but that I was able to bump into her does tell me that this is not a place that's easily read, and it's not a place where Democrats are going to act predictably.
Host: So, should we not look at the polls? The polls show Obama up, at least today, by nine and half percent.
Guest: You should look at the polls. You should, in fact, take the polls seriously in terms of what Obama is doing with the rest of the state. Keep in mind that these socially conservative economic liberals in the west have a mirror image in the east in the four counties that border Philadelphia on its west and northern boundaries. Those are Republicans who are economic conservatives and social liberals. So, we're seeing a huge vote out in that direction. The fact is, that part of the state is gaining population, or at least not losing it at the pace that we are. So those polls could very well be accurate, but I don't think Barack Obama is going to carry the state of Pennsylvania by 10 points. I think it's going to narrow. I think it always does.
Host: Dennis Roddy is a reporter for the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Thanks, Dennis.
Guest: Hey, it was a pleasure to be here.