Host: As we just heard, President Barack Obama is meeting with Republicans on Capitol Hill today. He's trying to convince them to vote for the stimulus bill, even though he doesn't really need their votes for passage. Slate's chief political correspondent, John Dickerson, writes about President Obama's call for bipartisanship, and what it really means, in his latest column. And John, why is it so important that the president get Republicans on his side on this? I mean, after all, he just said recently, I won.
Guest: That's right. He won, and he certainly has the votes in the House, and he only needs a small number of Republicans in the Senate. But even before he started working on the stimulus package, he told his Democratic allies that he wanted to get big margins, if he could, with a lot of Republican support. Why does he need that? Well, one is, he campaigned on the notion of building bridges and changing politics in Washington. But he also - he's got a lot of tough legislation coming down the road. If he gets into a confrontational fight with Republicans right off the bat on something that the public is behind and that everybody agrees needs to be done, this rescue package, then it doesn't portend well for the rest of the fights he's going to have coming down the lane. So he wants to try and get as many Republicans as he can. And the question now is how much of this opposition that he's seeing, how much of it is real? And how much of it is part of the dance of legislation that goes on with any new president?
Host: Right. Well, House Minority Leader John Boehner is urging his members not to vote for this, to say no to it.
Guest: That's right. And then, we have another interesting question, which is, in Boehner's case, you know, there was a time in his career where he was considered kind of a deal maker. In fact, back during the Gingrich Congress, some of the diehard conservatives said Boehner wasn't sufficiently conservative. Now, you see Boehner taking a very hard line on this bill, telling his fellow Republicans not to vote for it. And in the Senate, you see Mitch McConnell, who has also said some negative things about the stimulus, last week - on Friday - he gave a speech at the National Press Club in which he talked about bipartisanship. And Mitch McConnell, who is considered kind of a hard-liner, was sort of sounding all the right themes about bridge-building. So that's been an interesting reversal to watch here as well.
Host: Well, a lot of pundits are talking about what this means for President Obama and his ability to link the two parties. But really, what does it mean for Republicans when, as you say, most of the public is behind the stimulus bill?
Guest: For Obama, it's a challenge about whether he can meet the very high expectations he set for himself. Republicans have a different problem. They are not supporting this bill at the moment. And they have a very popular president who is doing everything - by appearances sake, anyway - to listen to them. As the public sees it, President Obama has made a real effort to reach out to Republicans, and the Republicans have not responded in kind. And if you look at the polling, Obama is not just popular across the land, but he's also popular with a lot of Republicans. And that's something that Republican leaders have to be careful and look out for as well.
Host: So in the end, do you think that a fair number of Republicans will go along with this plan?
Guest: Well, we'll see in the House on Wednesday. My guess is that you won't see a great number of Republicans in the House go for it. But in the Senate, Obama will get a few more, and he may get ever more, as he's in the middle of negotiating now.
Host: John, what about this call for bipartisanship? Is it perhaps overstated, that maybe there's a good thing in two sides having differing opinions and battling it out?
Guest: Bipartisanship is always tricky to define, you know, and what parts are good and what parts aren't that good. What Obama has said is that he wants all ideas to come forward. He hasn't said that he would accept all of the ideas. And it's his view that Washington has broken down with a kind of knee-jerk ideology and knee-jerk partisanship, and he wants to try and get past that. The question, and what we're trying to define now, is what, exactly that looks like. Does it mean you just listen to the other person's ideas, but you don't have to accept them? Or does it mean that you have to accept some number of ideas that your side doesn't particularly like? And the notion to some people, the notion that you would give in to the other side just for the sake of this theory of bipartisanship, is not only bad politics, but it sort of thwarts the will of the people who put you there in the first place. So we'll see how effective it is when we start seeing legislation come through. Another test is, of course, whatever the mark of bipartisanship here is on the stimulus package; will that carry over to other legislation?
Host: John Dickerson is chief political correspondent for Slate.com. Thanks, John.
Guest: Thank you.