Host: From NPR News this is News & Notes. I'm Farai Chideya. The White House gives a short-term emergency loan to Chrysler and General Motors, but there are strings attached. Will this keep the American auto business from going the way of the model T? And can the Obama team keep a stimulus plan under $1 trillion? That was an unthinkable number even a month ago, but the game has changed. Author and economist Dr. Julianne Malveaux is here to give us her wisdom on the state of the economy. She's the president of Bennett College. Hi, Dr. Malveaux.
Guest: Hi, Farai. How are you?
Host: I'm doing well. So the White House has decided on Friday to offer $17.4 billion in short-term loans to GM and Chrysler. This money is coming from TARP, which is the $700 billion or so on bailout, and so the president, President Bush, called it a chance for them to restructure. So explain to us what we're really talking about here.
Guest: Well, no money has exchange hands yet. Basically, Chrysler and General Motors have the opportunity to get $13.4 billion by mid-January. But it means that they have to do some things. They've got to talk about reducing their debt - debt of $60 billion - reducing that. They've got to talk about cutting labor costs, that's going to be a bit difficult. They're going to have to enter into negotiations with the United Auto Workers about cutting those labor costs, which means cutting people's pay. Then, if they're able to present something that is agreeable, they may get another $4 billion by February. Of course, this all comes out of the $350 billion that's already been authorized out of the $700 billion bailout. That money was being authorized in two parts, and the question that looms right now is whether or not Mr. Bush is going to ask for the second authorization now, or whether he's going to allow the Obama administration to come in and structure the second part of this bailout the way that they want to. So no money has exchange hands, but even the possibility of money brightens the possibilities for these two auto companies, who are struggling mightily. Part of the struggle certainly poor planning on their part, part of the struggle's a functions of our own careening downward economy.
Host: There are a lot of people who are working for the auto industry who are facing at least temporarily layoffs, plans to shut down for the month of January. Do we have any sense if this money, if it's freed up, will be freed up in time to really allow people to continue getting a salary?
Guest: It is likely that some people will experience layoffs. The money will not be released before the beginning, if not the middle, of January. I do think, obviously, Ford has bowed out saying that they're not in as bad shape as, let's say, GM or Chrysler, and I think that both GM and Chrysler do have some possibilities. So still, right now, the way that production works, people have to make decisions now about what's going to happen in January, and so - you know, if people are even off for two weeks, for hourly employees, this could be a hardship, if not a crisis.
Host: Now, President-elect Obama is going to be in the White House in March when he'll judge whether these companies have reorganized enough to be financially viable. So if the new administration doesn't like the plans, GM and Chrysler are going to have to pony up those billions and declare bankruptcy. What will happen if the auto companies fail to show that they're viable? And I don't mean what will happen to the auto companies, but what will happen to America, do you think?
Guest: In the very short run, we'll see crisis. I mean, bankruptcy - people behave as if bankruptcy is the end of the world. In many ways it's not. We've had airlines who've been operating under bankruptcy for months, if not for years. Bankruptcy basically freezes everything and give people an opportunity to reorganize. I mean, there are some who would say that GM, Chrysler ought to go bankrupt so that they can reorganize to emerge more efficient. Obviously, the short-term casualties through a bankruptcy are the human beings. And so that's why we want to avoid bankruptcy at all cost. But it means that the auto companies are really being given just a small reprieve. They've got to hit the box running in terms of how they want to reorganize themselves. And what a lot of people are not seeing - and that's why they really faulted at the beginning, Farai - is that you didn't see the flexibility from them. I mean, first coming in with these jets, the three of them individually, showed just basically contempt for the kind of sacrifices that many Americans are trying to make. But even if we don't get stuck on the symbols, we have to get stuck on the substance of an industry that is producing too many brands of inefficient-fuel cars, that took too long to get out of the SUV mode. And the questions that people are asking are, have you learned from the past?
Host: Now, let's turn to the Obama administration. They are putting together a stimulus plan, and they're hoping to keep the price tag under $1 trillion. That's trillion with a T. Do you think voters or lawmakers are going to say, hey, this is ridiculous, we can't do this?
Guest: Voters and lawmakers have already - lawmakers have already authorized $700 billion for a bailout. And what we've seen already with 300 billion of that in play is that we haven't seen the economic conditions change dramatically. From my perspective, Barack Obama and his administration's challenge is going to be to do a bailout plan, a stimulus plan that's far reaching enough that it really does kick start the economy, and gives us the opportunity to begin to re-examine economic fundamentals. If he chooses to tamp down on the price, to say less rather than more, is that going to be enough? We've got so many examples of attempting to be fiscally frugal in the short run meaning a lack of stimulus in the long run. So a trillion dollars is a lot of money, but we need at least three million more jobs in this economy, I'd say five. I mean, he started out saying two, and they've gone up to three. Let's think outside the box for a change. What troubles me about the stimulus package, Farai, is that it looks very much like stimulus packages past. And what we - the people who believe in, are excited by Barack Obama, want to see him to think all the way outside the box. You know, not only the whole issue of employment, of course they're looking at health, but there's some different ways to look at health, I think. And education. I haven't heard very much said - although I know that there are some like Senator - Congressman, rather - Claiborne looking at education here, but what about putting education, especially higher education into this? Now, we have seen school construction, but let's talk about higher education.
Host: Not just - I actually got some information this morning that one of the leads at the Kipp Academies, which are a very successful chain of charter schools that work in a lot of disadvantage communities, is going to join the administration, working with Arne Duncan, the proposed new Secretary of Education. So I think that's actually a very interesting move, because the Kipp Academies are ones that are often touted by both Conservatives and Liberals as a really good educational model, one where they have longer days, they have music education, they had a special school open for children affected by Katrina who were living in Houston. So there are going to probably be some more bridge-building moves like that. But I don't know a lot of it has become public, as you've said.
Guest: No. And I think it's fine. I mean, one of the things that's happened is our economy is in such dire straits, and the previous - the current administration has not done what many have expected. And so the Obama administration may be facing unrealistic expectations. Without them even coming in yet, we're talking about legislation that hasn't even been drafted, and I think in some ways it's a little bit unfair. On the other hand, this is the burden that this incoming president has. He is presiding over a recessionary economy at a time when, you know, tens, if not hundreds of thousands of people are losing jobs, and, you know, hundreds of thousands are in foreclosure. So you've got the perfect storm of economic unrest, and these expectations being placed on his shoulders. There's a lot to do, but for me, the bottom line is, let's not do it as usual, let's do it unusual. Let's figure out ways to not only stimulate the economy, but do it in a way that's fair.
Host: Let's talk a little bit about money. That is, the structure of financing and the Federal Reserve. The funds rate is now at a record low, between zero percent and 0.25 percent. What if anything has this done to jumpstart the economy?
Guest: It's done a little bit, but not a lot. We've seen interest rates go down. I think mortgage interest rates are at an all-time low. At the same time, I think that the only people who'd be able to take advantage of that are those with excellent credit, and we know that there's a credit crunch and a credit crisis. So we're looking at a situation where we can - some people, those who are very well-off, will be able to access money and credit at reasonable prices, or much more reasonable prices than they've ever seen before. Banks lend to banks at about three percent more than that rate, than that zero to 0.25 rate, and we did see some long-term rates or short-term rates go down. But if you have a credit card where the interest rate is 18.9 percent, believe me, they did not send you a letter that said, your interest rate is going down to 16 percent.
Host: This is the last time we're going to talk to you this year, 2008. Can you give us a quick economic forecast for 2009?
Guest: It's going to be a bad year. I encourage people to hold on to your cash, to be frugal. It is going to be a bad year. We - still, we've not jumpstarted. We haven't figured out what to do about the economy. The unemployment rate might go up to as high as eight percent. That would mean 16 to 17 percent for African-American people. That's one in six people without a job, not to mention the people who are dropping out of the labor market. I'm not optimistic about 2009, except for one or two things. I do think there are opportunities for activists to talk about the way the stimulus package might work, and how we get economic justice along with economic stimulus. And I know that the American people are resilient people. We've had hard times before. This is nothing on the scale of a great depression. We've had much worse recessions before. So we will weather this. It'll be a tough year, belt-tightening, and then it will emerge from a - I think, with an economy that maybe running a lot better than it was a year ago.
Host: Do you think that people - we, people, are going to change how we live?
Guest: I think some people are. You know, Farai, I've talked to people now about the holidays, and people are talking about less, talking about giving their children less, talking about borrowing less. And I think that's great. You know, it's difficult to talk about permanent behavioral change, but I hope that people will use this economic dry spell to think about what their real blessings are. I was talking to a friend this morning and she said, oh, we're going to have one meat instead of three meats at Christmas. And I said, you know - and the blessing is that we have a meat. There are other people who are not going to be eating as well as we are. So this is a great time, in the middle of this economic crisis, to look at ourselves, to look at our habits, but also to count our blessings.
Host: On that note, Happy Holidays to you.
Guest: And to you.
Host: That was economist Dr. Julianne Malveaux. She's also the president of Bennett College.