Host: From NPR News, this is Day to Day. Imagine this. You're in your car, and suddenly, you've got a hankering for Thai food. So, you pull out your phone. You ask it for a recommendation. It answers you. It even gives you directions there. This is the great promise of voice recognition technology. Several cell phones now use it. This week, Google released new software for Apple's iPhone. John Markoff wrote about it in the New York Times. He joins us now. Hi, John.
Guest: Hello.
Host: So, John, I've got my iPhone here. I downloaded this ap last night. Let's give it a little bit of a test run, and we should tell our listeners here, there's going to be a bit of an interference with the microphone. But let's take the example that I just used and give it a shot. So, Thai food, Los Angeles. I say that into my phone. It does a little working and processing, and next thing you know, it's popped up a list of all of the closest Thai Restaurants to me with phone numbers. It's pretty cool. How does this work?
Guest: Usually pretty well. It's also one of my nightmare scenarios as a bicyclist that people like you will be driving all over the place looking at your iPhones. But it works by capturing a small digital snippet of your voice and passing that along to all of Google's servers in the cloud. And Google first tries to interpret what you're saying, and then it takes that as text and passes it to its search engines and hopefully returns your restaurants to you.
Host: And you say hopefully. I tried this last night, and I said, sushi Los Feliz, which is a neighborhood here in Los Angeles, and the result I got back was sushi Rick Steve. How often are there misfires like this?
Guest: Well, you know, Google, as always, is keeping the actual performance of the technology pretty closely held. So, my sense is, it does well, but it's nowhere near 90 to 100 percent. It does, in my experimentation over about five days, it gets the right answer more than it gets the wrong answer, which in itself is impressive given the environment you often use these things in. And I used it in an extremely noisy restaurant, and it was still able to get reasonable results, which surprised me. It has good resistance to noise and background interference.
Host: And how does Google's software compare to the other voice-recognition software that's out there?
Guest: Well, without someone doing a strict, you know, sort of scientific comparison, which I'm sure people will do, I mean, my own sense is very impressionistic. For example, Microsoft has a service, Tell Me, and it will answer questions in very specific domains. It's not very free-form.
Host: You've been covering voice-recognition technology for many, many years now. How far along has it progressed?
Guest: Well, I think we're getting to the point where it's interesting. I must have seen my first speech-recognition system probably in the early 1980s. And it was a Navy-funded research project at SRI International in Menlo Park. And it allowed you to say things like left, right, ahead, stop. It was for driving a battleship, actually. And it was pretty limited. Now, I'd make the argument, for example, that if you have a very simple airline reservation, and you want to use, for example, United's interactive voice response unit over the telephone, it's simpler to use speech recognition than it is to go to Expedia, which I think is a meaningful bar.
Host: John Markoff writes about technology for the New York Times. Thanks, John.
Guest: Thank you.