Host: And now, though, for our personal story of recovery from addiction, we have Don W. Years of drug and alcohol abuse left this college graduate unemployed, on the streets, he finally sought help for his disease and is now been sober for 13 years. Don is here in the studio with me as well. Don, welcome. Mr. DON W. (Recovered Addict): Thank you. Let's begin with this. Talk briefly about your addiction, if you will, and how you managed to hide it from your family and your friends. Mr. DON W.: Oh, I think that's a very extensive question. To speak in reference to my addiction is to be trapped in something that I didn't even know I was trapped in. Starting out from a social position and with some ambition to be athletically oriented to want to have some success in an arena that I thought brought about the excitement I was looking for to find myself trapped into a substance abuse. Unknown to me, I had gotten involved in some chains that I didn't feel that I put on and at the end of it, they were too strong for me to break. When you finally came to grips with your addiction, what about the stigma, if any, you encountered from either your family or your friends or your work associates? Mr. DON W.: I think for me in terms of my addiction and in terms of stigma, I think what has happened is that at a point when I'm totally consumed, I've lost the ability to care. So, I don't feel stigmas on me in terms that I'm this or I'm that. I think what has happened for me is that I'm too consumed in trying to feed that which owns me, and therefore, hiding it from my family and hiding it from friends, associates, co-workers, has become to be something that is a manageable situation. I'm basically doing the best I can. And therefore, what happens is in the end of it, I'm found out when I'm trying not to be found out. You know, you heard Ed Storti and I talking about the functional addict. Well, straight out. Are you a functioning addict?
Guest: No, I was not a functioning addict. I think the term of that, is I might be - when you spoke in reference to stigma, I think I've got some experiences in my life to where I'm doing things and functioning and trying to pull it off. I think what has happened is that I'm in a position to where I'm doing the very best I can. If you want to call that functioning, then that's absolutely might be the stigma of calling me a functioning addict. But what is happening is my responsibility, my ability to do the things that I'm capable of doing are slipping away. So, I'm absolutely performing in a lesser ability than the ability that I started out with.
Host: So, what's a day like for you in terms of dealing with these things? I don't know if you would call them demons or not. But if they are, how do you cope with it during the course of a normal day for you?
Guest: What has been for me is I've absolutely been blessed, and been delivered up to being able to be associated within a program that has allowed me to have a support system, through attending a fellowship that provides a warm body of people who have experienced the plight of despair that I have, and has introduced to a process of being able to get in touch with something that's greater than myself. Rely, trust, and depend on that, and not have to be so self-centered organized about who I think I am, and get into a position of a surrender. Being surrendered has been the key to my ability to take a direction from not relying so much on Don, but being given the opportunity to find out that he's not in control. A personal day in my life is basically to attend a lot of support groups, be involved in a lot of service work, working with other people that are finding themselves within the same kind of troubles that I have had, and at the same time, prayer has been marvelous to me.
Host: Now, you are a - you work at a high school, correct?
Guest: At this point in time, yes.
Host: And my question is this. Are you hiding the facts about your past in order to maintain your job or do they know or is it an issue?
Guest: I've been fortunate enough to - and I want to say this here. It wasn't total part of the question. But I have had wonderful guidance, and at this point, I'd like to thank my sponsor which is Ron Kaye(ph). And what has happened when that time came up, I was able to work with the admission of who I was, and not hide under table of that I have something going on that they don't know who I am. So, I've been fortunate enough to where I work, everyone is aware of what my past is and I'm not my past. I'm presently standing in a new brand of dignity.
Host: That's a good thing to hear. But I want to follow it up with another question. Because I wonder if it is at all, it makes you anxious in terms of meeting new people or having to retell your story about your past, and whether or not there are occasions where you would rather not but you do, or sometimes you feel you must, in terms of talking about your past.
Guest: Well, when you asked me that question, what I think of is that my past is my greatest asset. And therefore, what I'm able to do is share with another human being those feelings of despair and what I did to overcome them and what did I rely on to bring me to a new freedom. Therefore, I'm sitting in a position at any given time to be of some service, then I hope that my hand is there to be outreached.
Host: In terms of the treatment that you had, briefly tell us about it. What worked? What was it that helped you seemingly perhaps the most?
Guest: Well, I'd not like to be pompous and have an ego rush here. I think what happened to me is but for the grace of God, I've been able to move forward. And what has happened for me is I've been given some willingness, the willingness to follow directions, the willingness to own the fact that I have caused some very sincere emotional, physical, and spiritual damage to some other people, and then accept a way in which to address those things at the best of my ability. So, I think that the question seems to ask me, what have I done? And that is absolutely be willing to a different direction than the direction I was traveling in.
Host: So, are you now providing treatment for others? And I don't mean that in a clinical sense, but support, help, understanding, perhaps?
Guest: I think, what I've been doing is what was so freely given to me, I've been free to give back to others.
Host: You look happy. You're smiling. You look - you seem healthy. And as you look - this is my final question. As you look back on how you fell into the spiral and then how you spiraled out of it, do you recognize triggers now?
Guest: I've been around long enough to know that there's a thousands of reasons to get involved in my addiction. What I know today is none of them were valid. And therefore, what happens is my trigger is to - just for today, I don't have to use.
Host: Do you recognize other - and I don't mean other, in terms of including you, but do you recognize functioning addicts when you see them?
Guest: I recognize people who have done some of the same things that I have done and that they're in denial of their condition. And in any given opportunity where I can assist them, I'm happy to do so.
Host: Are you drawn to say something to them when you recognize that or you see it?
Guest: You know, I'd like to encourage them as our earlier guest has stated, that there is hope, there is a way up and out.
Host: But you have to do it carefully?
Guest: You have to be willing to do it.
Host: I appreciate you're coming out. Thank you very much. Congratulations.
Guest: Thank you.
Host: That was Don W. who teaches special education at a southern California high school. He spoke with us about overcoming an addition to drugs and alcohol. He has been sober, 13 years. He joined me here at our NPR West studios.