Guest: Turning now, though, to our regular sports commentator, New York Times columnist Bill Rhoden. Hey, Mr. Rhoden. The great, once again, Tony Cox. It's nice to have you back. We're going to talk about baseball and football, but first, really briefly, what do you remember about that incident in '68, and what impact do you think it had on sports over the years? I'll never forget that. I was sitting around. I was a freshman at Morgan State University. I was a football player. And we were sitting around after practice watching that race. And I - it's like it happened yesterday. We were sitting around watching, and after the race, you know, these two great sprinters, and we were all sort of watching the, you know, the ceremony. And man, when they went up there, the national anthem went off, and these guys put their heads down, fists up, you could hear a pin drop in that room. Our mouths were open, and what it did for me, personally, Tony, it really defined and focused me in on the struggle and what, as an athlete, I could do and also just on integrity and courage. I think those are things that have never left me, and Tommie and John, you know, got to know them and know them well. They are what Jackie McLean called American heroes. It was a very, very, intense, very intense, time. I remember it very well myself. All right, let's move on to talk about some current day sports. Let's go to baseball first. The American League and National League, Championship series. One is over - one's almost over, it would appear. People were looking for the Red Sox and the Dodgers. That ain't going to happen. Bill? Yeah, you know, speaking of Smith and Carlos, we could segue into Manny Ramirez. Because, you know, he's sort of made a - some people here in Boston will probably disagree, but the fact that he is not here in Boston, and I think it really, really has colored this, you know, the Red Sox's chances. And sure, dramatically, we want to see the Dodgers and the Red Sox. That was sexy. The truth is that Manny, as great as he is, helped them get where they were. He couldn't get them over the top because Philadelphia's just too good. They're a better team, yep. They're just a better team, and Boston, if anybody had any doubts about what he meant to them, he just basically pulls sort of a plug out of their hearts. And I'd be stunned if they would - I'd be stunned if they survived, you know, if they survived the series, if they won another game. You think they - I don't think they'll win another game. Do you? You're up there. It's done. Yeah. No, it's really over. So are people going to watch? Before we move onto football, are people willing to watch on television the World Series between the Philadelphia Phillies and the Tampa Bay Rays? It's going to be a tough sale, Tony. I mean, it's going to be very good baseball, but in terms of the sexiness of it, I think that it's just going to be - it's going to be tough. All right. Let's talk about some things happening over on the people who play on Sundays, football and the NFL. Been kind of crazy this season. At the start of the season, Bill Rhoden, most experts were saying the elite teams were the Patriots, the Colts, the Chargers, the Cowboys, maybe even the Jaguars. Now, we're a little more than a quarter of the way through the season, and man, things have really changed. New England, 3 and 2, having lost their last game. The Colts trying to pick themselves up from a dismal start. A lot of average records out there. Tennessee, 5 and 0. Even the G-men, your beloved New York Giants, got their butts kicked last weekend, although they are still at the top of their division. Yeah, I think, in a weird way, my beloved Giants - by the way, Tony, I do think that the door is wide open for the New York Jets to go to the Super Bowl and, actually, to face the New York Giants. I think, right now, those two teams, with the addition of Tennessee, are the best teams in football right now. Even though the Giants lost, I think that was a trap game. They fell into it. But I think that those two teams are really the two best teams. I think, like I said, Tennessee is good. Kerry Collins - I still think that the jury is out, and what better guy to have on the bench incase Kerry Collins gets hurt than a humbled and refocused Vince Young? Well, you know, that's what I was going to ask you about quarterbacks. Because, you know, the elite quarterbacks have been, over the last few years, you know, Tom Brady, Brett Favre, (inaudible). Are we seeing a changing of the guard with some of these new, young quarterbacks coming in? I mean, I'm thinking about the kid in Atlanta, Matt Ryan, who played a terrific game last week. Yeah, Matt Ryan has been - has been tremendous. A changing of the guard? I'm not sure. You've got Ryan, obviously, and Phillip Rivers is tough, Drew Breeze. You're seeing a new wave of the same style. So, in that extent, but still, I think that the best quarterback out there is Favre. Favre is - he's coming to New York, and although we've got a ways to go, he is just, you know, working magic. Yeah, but he can throw six touchdowns one week and six interceptions the next week, can't he? He hasn't thrown the six yet. Not yet. He hasn't thrown the six interceptions yet. We'll have to wait and see. Here's our last topic before we get out of here. We've got a little bit more than a minute to go. Adam Jones in trouble again. I don't know what to say about him and how many opportunities the NFL is going to give this Dallas football player for getting back into the game when he keeps messing up over and over and over again. Yeah, yeah, it's a real tough situation, Tony. And it's one of those things where he - they put him in a very - he put himself in a very awkward position where now, the Dallas Cowboys give him their security detail, and I'm still waiting to find out what happened. Something happened. That your out with your own - a company hired security detail, and did you talk back to them? Did you say, listen, you know, I, you know, get out of my face? Something happened, but the bottom line is that he put himself in this position. He's going to have to pay the price for it, and it's unfortunate. Maybe this will open his eyes a little more. Well, one of the things that's being said about him because he's been in trouble so many times is that what got him by before was his ability to play on Sunday and how well he played. This season, he hasn't played so well. So that makes it even harder for him when he gets in trouble again, doesn't it? I got about 10 seconds for you to say - for you to agree with me. Yes. Yes I - Tony, I agree with the great Tony Cox. That's why we love having you on the show. Bill Rhoden, thank you very much. William C. Rhoden is a sports columnist for the New York Times and author of "Third and a Mile: The Trials and Triumphs Of The Black Quarterback." He's spoke to us from the studios of WGBH Boston, where he is covering the Red Sox-Rays series.