Host: The financial crisis has hit major financial institutions, but what if you don't have investments and live from paycheck to paycheck? How does all this Wall Street financial mumbo jumbo affect you? Here with us now is investment columnist for USA Today, John Waggoner. He is also the author of "Bailout: What the Rescue of Bear Stearns and the Credit Crises Means for your Investments." John, welcome.
Guest: Hey, thank you very much.
Host: Everybody who is an average taxpayer wants to know, how does this bailout affect me? So how does it affect the average taxpayer?
Guest: Well, it affects you in a couple of ways. One of which is is that, if it that if it works and the financial system does in fact stabilize and move forward, we're all better. We've averted a vast crisis. But it also does mean that probably down the pike you might be seeing higher taxes, you might be seeing higher inflation, you might be seeing a lower dollar. All of these things are potential possible fallouts from the bailout.
Host: To follow that point a little bit further. Let's say you have a person who pays his bill on time - his or her bills on time - has a mortgage, has a small savings account and no major investments. What does this mean to that person?
Guest: Well, if it all goes as planned, it means that the housing market will stabilize which means that - you know, the value of your own house depends to a large extent to the value of everyone else's houses. So if your neighbor is in foreclosure and sells it for a markedly lower price, that also means that your home price is lower. So to that extent, if it stabilizes then it means that the housing market will, one hopes, stabilize and begin to appreciate, and that's certainly one big benefit.
Host: Another area that people are very concerned about is this. People who have 401k retirement plans, whether or not they have real property or not, how should they deal with this?
Guest: Well, there's a couple of things that you can do to gain, you know, a decent amount at retirement. You have really three factors that affect how much you are going to have at retirement. One is how much you save. Another is how much you pay for your investments. And the other is how your investments perform. By and large, the only ones that you can really control are how much you save and the price that you pay for your investing. You can't really control what the capital markets are going to give you. So if you're concerned that you're not going to meet your goal, the easiest or at least the most rational step to do is to step up your savings and try to save more. You could also - I think this is a terrific time to be as diversified as humanly possible. You want a little in bonds, you want a little in cash, you want some in stocks, you want some in international stocks. That way, at least if part of the economy falls apart, there are other things that will boost your returns.
Host: You mentioned something I want to follow up on again with you about diversifying your portfolio, if you have one. If you do decide to move your money, whether it's a portfolio or a small savings account, and you want to do it right now because you're not confident, where should you put that money?
Guest: Ah. Well, I think that if you're really terrified of everything, your local bank is going to insure your savings account up to one hundred thousand dollars, more if you have a retirement account. And frankly, if the government falls through on that, you probably have other things in your life to worry about than what your savings are doing, like where am I going to get my canned goods?
Host: Well, that's an interesting - an interesting response. I'm sure you heard Bill Spriggs earlier talk about Goldman Sachs and the end of the investment bank as we know it. A lot of times - you know, the corner bank is not the institution that it once was, so we have commercial banks, we no longer have investment banks. Does it make a difference which bank, which type of bank you now put your money in, given the crisis that we're facing?
Guest: Well, generally speaking, you're going to have 100,000 dollars insurance in most financial institutions. There are a very a few uninsured institutions. I believe there are credit unions that are privately insured, but they're rare as hen's teeth. By and large, it doesn't matter. As long as you stay under the 100,000 dollar limit, I think you'll be fine. I'd be curious to see what Goldman's teller window looks like and whether they give away toasters, but I somehow think it will be a little different from the corner bank.
Host: When the government says, for example, that it has moved to secure mutual funds and people need not worry about their money, how can the average person have confidence in that right now?
Guest: Well, to be specific, they're really only backing money market mutual funds. And even more specifically, I believe that some of those have to - the ones that do have to pay into the fund that insures it. So the first thing you need to do is call your fund and see, you know, are you going to be covered, are you going to buy into the pool? I have to say, in all my years - and I've been doing this for a ridiculously long amount of time - I was extraordinarily surprised by the collapse of money funds. If you - right now, they are being backed by the government, and I think that's as good as you can get. If you're - again, if you're terrified, you're going to want to go to Treasury bills or you're going to want to go to your local bank
Host: All right, John, hold on for a minute. We're going to take a quick break and we're going to come back and continue this conversation, and we're going to ask you to answer some questions from some listeners on News & Notes. We'll be right back. This is News & Notes, I'm Tony Cox. We're back with USA Today's investment columnist, John Waggoner. John, you've been explaining to us how the ripple effects of Wall Street are hitting the average American, and now we have some questions for you from a few of our listeners. You ready?
Guest: Great, Tony, yes.
Host: Here's the first one. Renee Mack Jones(ph) of Atlanta, Georgia, asks this question. I keep hearing people say that this 700 billion dollars in government rescue money is absolutely necessary, and if the government didn't step in and do something, there would have been a global financial meltdown. But there must be some negative side effects to this historically expensive bailout. What are they, and where are the hundreds of billions of dollars coming from when there is such a large deficit already?
Guest: Sure. Well, there are two main drawbacks. One is basically the principle that if you bail these folks out, really you're just encouraging them, they need to be punished for their transgressions, and that some feel that what has happened so far really makes them feel that they haven't been spanked hard enough, that they need really some more pain to avoid such problems in the past. Now, on the other hand, if you ask a shareholder of, say of Fannie Mae, for example, they certainly have suffered a great deal. But there is some talk about, how do you discourage this kind of behavior when you bail them out? So that's kind of a big picture thing that people have to wrestle with. On a more practical level, the question is, OK, where does this money come from? And the answer is fairly simple. We borrow it or we print it, really. And that has other ramifications that can be rather unpleasant. What the Fed is really trying to balance out is whether the unpleasantness of what would happen if we didn't bail them out outweighs what happens when we do.
Host: Here's another question. This one comes from Nina Canzanero(ph) of Sparta, New Jersey, who asks, as a small business, we possess three separate bank accounts. A primary checking, a second checking we use for the payroll and the money market account. All three are in the name of the business. If our bank were to go bankrupt, how do the FDIC rules apply to our bank?
Guest: Interestingly, you get 100,000 dollars worth of insurance. After that, you would either have to move - you would really have to move to a different bank. Now, there may be a provision for pension funds, and that's a little bit different. But by and large, 100,000 dollars, if it's all in the name of the same company, is your limit. So if you're concerned about that, you might want to spread out your bank holdings a little bit. You might want to put, you know, your payroll in one bank and your savings in another bank, and that would cover - you'd then get 100,000 dollars at each institution.
Host: Here's a question that's similar to one that I asked you in our earlier segment. It comes from Rae Ann Albus Hunt(ph), who wants to know if any bank is safe these days. She's just starting her retirement planning and wants to know where she should invest her money.
Guest: Sure. Well, the answer is is that, yeah, you know, by and large, most banks are safe, and I think you really do have to trust the government guarantee. Now, if you're particularly paranoid, you could say, for example, that you'll go to a very large bank because the risk of that bank failing is far more than, say, a smaller bank. So you want to go to a big institution that they call too big to fail. But also, if you are just beginning to save for your retirement and you're relatively young, you have to realize that right now you'll be earning about two percent on your money, which means that you will double your money in roughly every 36 years. So that's a pretty low rate of return, and you might want to find something that has a bit more return and a bit more risk, but if you're young, you can probably take those risks.
Host: Great. That's great. Here's a question that I have for you, actually.
Guest: Sure.
Host: And it's this. The economy is in a meltdown, and housing prices, home prices have been dropping. Does that mean that this is a good time to buy a home, if you can?
Guest: Right. Well, you know, that's an interesting question. And every once in a while I've looked in my own local paper and seen a couple of houses pop up for what seem ridiculously low prices. Now, the problem with real estate is two-fold, one of which is, yeah, you can get some houses for, you know, really bargain prices, but you kind of have to know what you're getting into. In other words, you really need someone competent to make sure that the house is structurally sound. You really don't want to buy this massive money pit liability, because one of the things that people have discovered with real estate is that when you make a mortgage and you borrow, it is entirely possible to lose not only what you invest but far more than you invest. So you have to be very careful going in. That said, you know, if you're a young couple, you have good credit, and you can put 20 percent down, you know, you can do pretty nicely in the housing market these days.
Host: The credit rates available for people looking for loans is good, bad, otherwise, what?
Guest: Well, if you are what they call a conforming loan, i.e., that you have 20 percent down, you have great credit, you've got a job and you, you know, generally meet everything that a banker loves, yeah, they'll - you know, it's time to come on down, they'll love to see you. If you have shaky credit, if you don't have a decent down payment, if you've been laid off, if you have other problems, you're going to have a hard time getting a loan
Host: All right, John, thank you very much. Very good information. We appreciate it.
Guest: Thank you so much, Tony.
Host: That was John Waggoner, an investment columnist for USA Today. He is also the author of "Bailout: What The Rescue of Bear Stearns and the Credit Crisis Means For Your Investments." John joined us from the headquarters of NPR in Washington, D.C.