Host: From NPR News this is News & Notes. From NPR News this is News & Notes. I'm Farai Chideya. I'm Farai Chideya. It was historic and maybe a little awkward. It was historic and maybe a little awkward. Yesterday, President-elect Barack Obama and his family met with President George Bush for a tour of the White House. Yesterday, President-elect Barack Obama and his family met with President George Bush for a tour of the White House. It's not just the tenants of the White House that are changing. It's not just the tenants of the White House that are changing. Senator Obama and his team are proposing some big changes in government too. Senator Obama and his team are proposing some big changes in government too. For more on the transition to the White House we have NPR Senior Washington editor Ron Elving. For more on the transition to the White House we have NPR Senior Washington editor Ron Elving. Hi, Ron. Hi, Ron.
Guest: Good to be with you, Farai. Good to be with you, Farai.
Host: So Senator Obama hasn't been particularly supportive of President Bush's administration. So Senator Obama hasn't been particularly supportive of President Bush's administration. He's referred to eight failed years of policy when he was on the campaign trail. He's referred to eight failed years of policy when he was on the campaign trail. But now he said it's time to put politics aside and given what's been going on in the tensions between these two men and their philosophies, what kind of transition can we expect? But now he said it's time to put politics aside and given what's been going on in the tensions between these two men and their philosophies, what kind of transition can we expect?
Guest: I think we're going to see a relatively orderly transition. I think we're going to see a relatively orderly transition. This is something we've come to be spoiled about in the United States because compared to most countries in the world, our system almost celebrates the transfer of power as a kind of happy ritual in which we are glad that we don't have any more contentious back-and-forth and tests of power and strength to get there. This is something we've come to be spoiled about in the United States because compared to most countries in the world, our system almost celebrates the transfer of power as a kind of happy ritual in which we are glad that we don't have any more contentious back-and-forth and tests of power and strength to get there. On the other hand we have seen - for example the year 2000 - that it can take a little longer than the system is set up to normally expect, and under circumstances such as those eight years ago, of course it took five weeks to determine the winner of the presidential election. On the other hand we have seen - for example the year 2000 - that it can take a little longer than the system is set up to normally expect, and under circumstances such as those eight years ago, of course it took five weeks to determine the winner of the presidential election. Then it can be strained and truly difficult, particularly when you have a change of power between the two parties. Then it can be strained and truly difficult, particularly when you have a change of power between the two parties. But I think given the economic situation the country's in right now, the financial meltdown, also the two wars that are continuing, the rather large number of people - six figures - who are in combat around the world for the United States, in times such as these the transition really needs to be as cordial and as respectful and as orderly as possible. But I think given the economic situation the country's in right now, the financial meltdown, also the two wars that are continuing, the rather large number of people - six figures - who are in combat around the world for the United States, in times such as these the transition really needs to be as cordial and as respectful and as orderly as possible.
Host: What about rollbacks of policies? What about rollbacks of policies? Because there are a lot of different policy approaches, everything from big ones like the Guantanamo prison camps in Cuba to smaller ones that Senator Obama disagrees with. Because there are a lot of different policy approaches, everything from big ones like the Guantanamo prison camps in Cuba to smaller ones that Senator Obama disagrees with. What do you think he's going to focus on changing, say within the first hundred days of his term? What do you think he's going to focus on changing, say within the first hundred days of his term?
Guest: The first thing he'll need to do is to look down a list which is being prepared even now of executive orders that have changed federal policy over the last eight years. The first thing he'll need to do is to look down a list which is being prepared even now of executive orders that have changed federal policy over the last eight years. These are things the president can do on his own. These are things the president can do on his own. Things the president can do without asking Congress for anything, for authority, for money, for confirmation of an appointment. Things the president can do without asking Congress for anything, for authority, for money, for confirmation of an appointment. So when the president can simply say, the federal government will now do X, or Y or Z, or the opposite of what it had been doing, wherever that's possible that's the first place where a president can have some impact and it's also sometimes the last place a president can have some impact. So when the president can simply say, the federal government will now do X, or Y or Z, or the opposite of what it had been doing, wherever that's possible that's the first place where a president can have some impact and it's also sometimes the last place a president can have some impact. In the final weeks of this presidency we expect George W. Bush to try to issue a lot of executive orders to set certain policies in place, and those will probably be among the first ones that Barack Obama tries to reverse starting January 21st, the day after he takes the oath of office. In the final weeks of this presidency we expect George W. Bush to try to issue a lot of executive orders to set certain policies in place, and those will probably be among the first ones that Barack Obama tries to reverse starting January 21st, the day after he takes the oath of office.
Host: Give me an example of something that might fall under that category? Give me an example of something that might fall under that category?
Guest: One of the big ones is the treatment of federal research dollars that go for supporting research to attack certain diseases. One of the big ones is the treatment of federal research dollars that go for supporting research to attack certain diseases. Those dollars have been prohibited up to now by the Bush administration from going to any research that's based on stem cells taken from human embryos. Those dollars have been prohibited up to now by the Bush administration from going to any research that's based on stem cells taken from human embryos. If human embryos were involved, the Bush administration did not want that research to go forward because it destroyed those human embryos which potentially - although most of them were on their way to being destroyed as medical waste - potentially, those could develop into human beings. If human embryos were involved, the Bush administration did not want that research to go forward because it destroyed those human embryos which potentially - although most of them were on their way to being destroyed as medical waste - potentially, those could develop into human beings. So the Bush administration took the view that that was a kind of sacrifice of life, and therefore they didn't want to fund with federal money any such research. So the Bush administration took the view that that was a kind of sacrifice of life, and therefore they didn't want to fund with federal money any such research. So they went forward, of course, with private money. So they went forward, of course, with private money. And the Bush administration was more than willing to fund stem cell research as long as the stem cells came from some other source other than human embryos. And the Bush administration was more than willing to fund stem cell research as long as the stem cells came from some other source other than human embryos. That is a controversial position because, of course, it greatly restricts the amount of research that can go on in an area that many scientists regard as highly promising to cure many different diseases. That is a controversial position because, of course, it greatly restricts the amount of research that can go on in an area that many scientists regard as highly promising to cure many different diseases. And so we expect, given his position in the Senate and what he has said in his campaign, that will be one of the first policies Barack Obama reverses. And so we expect, given his position in the Senate and what he has said in his campaign, that will be one of the first policies Barack Obama reverses.
Host: All right. All right. What about veterans' health care? What about veterans' health care? It is Veteran's Day. It is Veteran's Day. There were - there was Dole Shalala Commission in the last administration - or in the current administration, outgoing administration, that tried to take a look at the needs of veterans and health care. There were - there was Dole Shalala Commission in the last administration - or in the current administration, outgoing administration, that tried to take a look at the needs of veterans and health care. Do you think that Senator Obama is going to make that a priority? Do you think that Senator Obama is going to make that a priority?
Guest: Yes I do. Yes I do. Surprisingly, this was not an area in which the Bush administration with all of its emphasis on the military really covered itself in glory. Surprisingly, this was not an area in which the Bush administration with all of its emphasis on the military really covered itself in glory. They left themselves very vulnerable in this, both the Walter Reed Hospital and in a number of other ways. They left themselves very vulnerable in this, both the Walter Reed Hospital and in a number of other ways. This is something where the Obama administration can immediately endear itself to the veteran's community. This is something where the Obama administration can immediately endear itself to the veteran's community.
Host: All right. All right. Ron, great to talk to you. Ron, great to talk to you. Thanks. Thanks.
Guest: Thank you,Farai. Thank you,Farai.
Host: That was Ron Elving, NPR's Senior Washington editor, and he spoke to us from NPR's headquarters in Washington, D.C. That was Ron Elving, NPR's Senior Washington editor, and he spoke to us from NPR's headquarters in Washington, D.C.