Host: For NPR News this is News & Notes. I'm Tony Cox. Worries about Hurricane Gustav are starting to wane. The category two hurricane has now been downgraded to a tropical depression, and levees in both New Orleans and outside the city appear to be holding. Joining me now is NPR's Ari Shapiro with the latest from the Gulf. Ari, how are you?
Guest: I'm good, Tony. Thanks.
Host: Two things, is the worst behind us, and what about the damage?
Guest: The worst is behind us. You know, this was the largest evacuation in Louisiana history because people were afraid that this storm could have been worse than Katrina. It was by no stretch of the imagination worse than Katrina. The storm - the city appears to have escaped largely unscathed. There's power out through a lot of the city, but crews are on the streets today trying to restore power. There are branches and trees down. Crews are picking that up as well. And within the next couple of days we expect that evacuees will be allowed to start returning to the city.
Host: Three years ago Hurricane Katrina flooded 80 percent of New Orleans, killed 1,600 people. You've already indicated that there are major differences between Katrina and Gustav. Is it because the storm didn't directly hit New Orleans?
Guest: It's because the storm didn't directly hit New Orleans. It's because the storm was weaker. And to a certain extent it's also because of repairs and fixes that were made to some of the systems that broke during Katrina. The systems are not all where they need to be, but you know, at the Industrial Canal where the Upper Ninth Ward is, yesterday, for example, I was there and there were waves lapping over the top of the canal causing maybe six inches to a foot of water to accumulate in the Upper Ninth Ward. But the levee held, you know. During Katrina we saw walls like that one break, flooding the Ninth Ward under feet and feet of water, as we all remember. And while the waves were lapping over the top of the wall yesterday, the wall held because of repairs that the Army Corp of Engineers had made in the last three years. And so that was one major difference.
Host: One of the memories I think a lot of us have of what occurred during Katrina was to watch the pictures of people being rescued and the boats. But we don't see those kinds of pictures this time around. Talk about the rescue efforts.
Guest: Yeah. There were teams in place before the storm hit. There were roughly 100 boats, some from as far away as California. There were airplanes. There were 3,000 police officers and National Guard troops patrolling the city. And they were ready to mobilize a massive search and rescue operation after the storm passed. Once the storm passed, you know, they went out. They inspected areas around New Orleans, and at least where I am at any rate, it doesn't look like there were many people who needed to be rescued. Now, the Department of Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff says that's not because it wasn't a bad storm. He says that's because people evacuated. By one estimate there were only 10,000 people left in the city of New Orleans when Gustav hit. But the people who did ride out the storm here in the city today are saying that they think they made the right choice. They don't feel like the storm was that bad and, you know, they think it was pretty much a piece of cake to ride it out. Here in the French Quarter where I am right now, the power came back on by yesterday afternoon.
Host: Now, when are the people going to be allowed to return? We know that there were close to 2 million who were evacuated, and there's still no word yet on when exactly it's safe for them to come back, is there?
Guest: That's right. Today, Mayor Ray Nagin wants to keep the streets of New Orleans clear so that crews can work clearing debris, putting power lines back up, and restoring services to the city. He said some businesses are going to be able to start returning Wednesday, and evacuees shortly after that. He said it's going to be a matter of days, not weeks. People are obviously very antsy to come back, not only just to start their lives again, but also because their homes are, in many cases, empty and unprotected, and three years ago there was so much looting during Hurricane Katrina that people want to come back and make sure that their things are safe. Mayor Ray Nagin says we've got that covered. He says, you know, with 3,000 troops on the ground we are not going to let looting take place. But I can tell you when the city is pitch black at night with no power and the streets are empty, it's easy to imagine somebody sneaking into a backyard and smashing a door. So far there have not been many arrests. As of 8:00 PM Monday night, Mayor Nagin said there were two arrests, one for looting, one for stealing gasoline. But otherwise it doesn't seem to be nearly as bad as it was during Katrina.
Host: Final thing is this, what would you say it's like there? You gave us a little bit of a description of the streets being dark at night. They're supposed to be - here's why I ask - there's supposed to be an NFL game played in the Super Dome on Sunday, but it's not clear who might be in the stands if anybody by then?
Guest: You know, I have to say with just less than the 24 hours that have passed since the hurricane stopped blowing wind and rain, I'm amazed at how quickly the city is bouncing back. People have not started flooding back into the city yet, and when they do, you know, I'm sure streets will be clogged and there will be some challenges to deal with. But right now power is coming back on really quickly. We are seeing streets cleaned up. In front of me right now there is a dump truck loading all kinds of debris. And it would not surprise me if by Sunday the city were looking pretty good.
Host: Ari, thanks a lot.
Guest: Good to talk to you.
Host: That was NPR's Ari Shaprio in New Orleans.