Host: Believe it or not, Billboard magazine is a 114 years old. Its "Hot 100 Chart" has been around for half a century. It launched back in 1958, when Danny & The Juniors topped the charts with "At the Hop." To mark the anniversary, Billboard magazine compiled an "All Time Hot 100" list of the most popular singles in the last 50 years. Geoff Mayfield is Billboard's editorial director, and he's here to tell us more about their picks. Hey, Geoff.
Guest: Hello, how are you doing, Farai?
Host: So we've been listening to a bit of Chubby Checker's hit from the year 1960, "The Twist," and you rated it the All Time Hottest Single. So, why?
Guest: Well, basically, there has been lot of misunderstanding about this chart. The all time 50th anniversary of the hot 100 is really just a weekly compilation, or it's a look at the entire chart performances happened during these 50 years. And we had to wait earlier eras, because since 1991, when we had our hands on better data, big hits can stay on the chart longer, so we graded on the curve, and based on chart performance, Chubby Checker had the most-impressive chart performance of all time.
Host: So look, the "Macarena" made it into the top five...
Guest: Yeah, we've heard a lot of complaints about that.
Host: Beating out "Hey, Jude" by The Beatles. Yeah. Tell me about the complaints, because you know, the "Macarena," I remember an ignominious moment doing the "Macarenia(ph)" on television back during the '96 election.
Guest: Doesn't sound like you're proud of it.
Host: It doesn't sound like I'm proud of it, and I'm not, but I mentioned it, because it was kind of a one-hit wonder. Why...
Guest: Yeah. But see, that's the - I'm really glad you asked that, because this is - as I just said a moment ago - this is about chart performances. It's not - this is not an editorial list, unlike when Rolling Stone puts up a list of all time songs, or any other music journal that you see, this is strictly based on how things acted on the Hot 100. And "Macarena" was on the chart for 60 weeks. It's the longest chart run by any number one song. I spent that year that you danced to it not liking the song, you know, and getting kind of tired of hearing it following me around. I mean, I go to a ball park, and I couldn't escape the "Macarena." So, this was not by any means an editorial list. This is a list of the songs that had the best performance, and, you know, 60 weeks on the chart, no other number-one record could say it did that.
Host: So, what does it say about our taste and - I mean, our buying taste as well as our listening taste, to take a look at, you know, kind of what really hit the top of the charts?
Guest: Well, you have to remember that there's different chart rules that had been in place throughout the 50 years. We do the charts differently now than we did five years ago. We do them differently now than we did them 13 months ago. And certainly, they're different than they were before '98, and so there's been different behavior, there were different rules up until 1998. You could not appear on this chart unless there was a retail available single. Well, as the market got to the point where there were fewer and fewer hits being released to stores, we had to leave that rule behind. So part of what you see here is just, this is what Top 40 Radio was like at a time. This is what consumers were buying at the time. And you know, sometimes when you see a song that's seems weak to your personal frame of reds - reference, it might be that that record was on the chart during a weak time. For instance, in the top 10 of this lists is, "You Light Up My Life," by Debby Boone. Now, that record was number one for 10 weeks. By current standards, we've had several number one's that had been on top of the chart longer than that, but for the era that she charted, 1977. Being number one for 10 weeks was kind of like being number one for 20 or 30 weeks. So, you know, maybe I have not stopped to study 1977 enough, but it maybe that she didn't have a lot of competition, and that's why she was able to stay number one longer than other records that you're did.
Host: Can you give me an example of something that's on the list from the past, you know, five, 10 years?
Guest: Well, actually, we - there's three records on the chart, the chart of this year. Within the top of 30, you have Flo Rida, and then there - a couple of other songs that were charting this year were Alicia Keys and one by Timbaland with "One Republic." So, you know, in the - if you look at the top ten, one thing I'm happy about in terms of grading on the curve, if you look at the top ten, every decade that this chart has touched, is represented here. We have one from the 50s, and we also have the '60s, '70s, '80s, and '90s, and this decade represented. But yeah, there's ample representation of recent hits here. One from this decade in the top 10 being by Mariah Carey, "We Belong Together."
Host: All right, what is changing about the music game with digital distribution? Does it affect how people buy singles, and what might be on the top 100 in the next 50 years?
Guest: Actually, digital already has impact and very beneficial impact on this chart. One of the dilemmas we had in the late '90s and in the early part of this decade, was as I mentioned there were fewer singles being released to stores, and one of the beauties of the "Hot 100" was it's never been one pool of information. It was sales and radios, so you had a more comprehensive look at popularity. And at the beginning, it was jukeboxes too. As of August of last year, we added internet streaming and on-demand music and music video from the internet, so it's always evolving to be a more complete view. But what happened was, with the removal of singles from store. For a few years there, the sales voice on this chart was kind of like the sprig of parsley that you put on a steak, and the rest of the chart was pretty cooked up by radio information. Thanks to the advent of iTunes and the other digital merchants, there's a very vibrant a la carte song market out there, and it's made a big difference in the kinds of songs that show up on the chart. And we will continue to look for other things. We want to get more of the internet streaming services represented in the chart. We want to look at satellite radio. We want to look at YouTube, ring tones, so we're not going to stay in one corner. We're always going to try to make sure that this chart reflects the different ways that the consumer experiences music.
Host: All right, very briefly, why do you think Billboard has lasted so long as a magazine?
Guest: Hopefully it's because we've done our job right, and I want to clarify something, I'm not the editorial director. I'm the director of the charts department, but one thing that certainly been a big thing for us is the charts. The biggest traffic draw on billboard.com every week is Thursday when we refresh our charts. So it's certainly the way that we touch consumers, and certainly as a business publication, we hope that we're serving the needs of people within the music industry, and people who also need to have gateway into the music industry.
Host: Well hey, I wanted to give you a promotion, so that's why we called you editorial director...
Guest: OK.
Host: But you are director of the charts department, and that is a big job and a very interesting one. So, Geoff, thanks so much.
Guest: Thank you.
Host: That was Geoff Mayfield, director of the charts department at Billboard Magazine.