Host: And now it's letter time. Our editor Sasa Woodruff is here with me. Hey, Sasa.
Guest: Hey, Farai. How's it going?
Host: I am doing great. So what are folks saying this week?
Guest: Well as you can imagine, we got some letters about our economy coverage. On a Bloggers' Roundtable last week, we discussed reports that some were blaming the mortgage crises on African-Americans and other minorities.
Host: Matt Luazo(ph) wrote us this. What I believe should be clarified is that the regulation requiring lending to people that using credit standards previously prevailing could not obtain credit led to lending with higher risk. In addition, this regulation required no discrimination as to interest rate.
Guest: Then John Hewey(ph) commented on the month-long series we're doing on voting. He wrote, your guests made no mention of the real problems with the U.S. voting system. The system is designed to protect incumbents. It's much harder to register and vote in the U.S. then in other countries, and our winner-take-all system gives runners-up no consideration.
Host: Listener Jennifer Combs(ph) wrote in after listening to a Bloggers' Roundtable segment on Monday. She said News & Notes is not benefiting from using so many bloggers as commentators slash analysts. The show would get sharper, more focused analysis from academics, non-profit leaders, and print or TV reporters.
Guest: And finally we heard from Sandra Bowen(ph) who listens to us from Raleigh, North Carolina. She wrote in after she heard our political contributor say you, Farai, would be a good host for a presidential debate. Your show today with Donna Brazile and others was magnificent. Donna hits home, and I love her for that. Especially the comments she made at the end stating that you would be a good candidate to conduct the presidential debate. You've got my vote. And thanks for your letters. Please keep your comments coming.
Host: To write us, just log onto npr.org then click on Contact Us. When you get there you'll see lots of show to choose from. Make sure you chose News & Notes when you write to us.
Guest: And be sure you tell us where you are writing from and how to pronounce your name.
Host: Thanks Sasa.
Guest: No problem.