Host: Let's turn now to our regular sports commentator, an all-around know-everything-there-is-to know-in-the-world-of-sports expert, New York Times columnist Bill Rhoden. Hey, Bill.
Guest: Hey, great Tony Cox. How are you doing?
Host: I'm doing great, man. Listen, we saw a lot of great retired players in Washington on Tuesday, NBA players like Magic Johnson, Kevin Johnson; football stars like Jim Brown, that we just heard; Mohammad Ali, they were all there. What do you make of their commitment to being a part of all of this? And is it just because of Obama that younger athletes are willing to step up front again and take political positions?
Guest: You know, I thought it was great to see those guys and it was a great interview you just did with Jim Brown.
Host: Thank you.
Guest: Tony, really, really outstanding. And I think that as you mentioned, I think those guys, Mohammad Ali and Jim Brown, they were all part of the civil-rights struggle, and the further you go back in our history, the tighter that bond was between the African-American athlete and the movement, because they saw each other in themselves. You know, there was really not a distinction. And I think that he brought up a great point about Obama's athleticism, but also his intellectualism and how they coexist and how he believes they coexist. And I think he is going to have a tremendous impact on a lot of young athletes, man, from everything from, you know, looking at themselves maybe in an intellectual way to - I've had a number of calls from guys who are saying that in the couple of years when they retire they'd like to run for office. I think that the impact is going to be really, really great on the field - on athletics, which I think has somewhat been overlooked on the intellectual side.
Host: Now, do you think that this is the most athletic president that we've had? Now, I know that Gerald Ford was a University of Michigan football player, and you know, Ronald Reagan liked to chop wood, and Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton used to, you know, run around and stuff. But is he the athlete so far in the White House?
Guest: He's got a jumper.
Host: OK. The Obama jumper, huh?
Guest: Yeah, he's got a legitimate game, you know. So, yeah, I think that - I mean, Kennedy played, I mean, like, touch football, that kind of stuff, but now I think that Barack really -you could just see the way, you know, he moves, and he's pretty coordinated, and you know, he can go to his left.
Host: Well, that's true. He's no Dick Barnett, but let's say, he can play. Now, I will say this. Former NBA star now Sacramento Mayor Kevin Johnson has been talking a little trash. He says apparently - apparently, let me say that first - that if the president offered him, Kevin Johnson, a game, it would be the first mistake of the administration. And Kevin says he'd have to dunk on the president. NBA players are really trying to get in the White House, hoping that he actually does put a basketball court in there instead of that bowling alley.
Guest: Yeah. Well, that's going to be - you know, you could just see it now. I mean, that's going to be the big thing, who gets the invitation to come and play.
Host: Yeah.
Guest: But Kevin, do not dunk on the president...
Host: Absolutely, and we just can't have that...
Guest: I will just tell you that now...
Host: That'd be a security issue. Boy, talking about being slam-dunked after he dunked on the president.
Guest: Please don't do that.
Host: All right. Let's talk Super Bowl. That's coming up in a couple of weeks, always a big event with huge ratings. But to the degree that matchups matter, Bill Rhoden, how exciting is this matchup between the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Arizona Cardinals?
Guest: You know, football, Tony, I really love this, man. I'd always thought that, you know, when we look at the Final Four teams, I was like, please God don't let there be an all-defensive team, you know, no Philly, Pittsburgh. No, I think this is great because you got a team in Arizona, and Kurt Warner who could really put up the numbers, who could really put up the points, and you've got a team in Pittsburgh who, as we've seen, in one of the most brutal games I've seen in a while, can really stop people. So, I think we're going to - we're really going to be able to see this great defense stop great offense.
Host: You know, talk about a turn of fortune. Kurt Warner is the toast again, maybe headed for the hall of fame if he leads Arizona to a win over Pittsburgh, which would be his second win with a different team; while Donovan McNabb, bless his soul, is back in the never-made-it-there column again.
Guest: Yeah, poor Donovan. But you know, what can you say? He had a - have had a good year. He had a good year, but you know, in this society, man, you're judged on did you get to the dance?
Host: Right. Did you finish?
Guest: That's right. Did you win? And you're right. Kurt, tremendous story, bagging groceries, MVP, almost out of the league, came to Arizona to sit on the bench...
Host: Arena league.
Guest: Arena league, I mean...
Host: Yeah, he's a great story, absolutely. Another great story, though, before I let you get away from here is Mike Tomlin, headed to the Super Bowl, in what, his second, third year as a coach? That's pretty impressive.
Guest: Oh, yeah, yeah. I mean, I think Jim said this is not just he's his brother, but that, you know, his kind is - he leads a group of very young coaches, and I think in front of our eyes we've seen this transformation from the sort of old, recycled guys to all these young bloods with a lot of perk and energy.
Host: You know, the Rooney Rule that Jim Brown made reference to with Art Rooney hiring, the Rooney family hiring Mike Tomlin, this is an example of, give a brother a chance and some good things can happen.
Guest: Yeah. We need a Rooney Rule on the media, Tony. Of course, we'll get to that next month, but...
Host: The best story.
Guest: Just another story.
Host: Really quickly, the New York Jets have announced their new head coach, Bill, and I know that that is a subject of your next wonderful column. Give us a sneak preview.
Guest: Well, yeah. Buddy Ryan's son, Rex Ryan, had his first conference yesterday, and you know, he was so enthusiastic I was ready to snap on the pass.
Host: Really?
Guest: Yeah, I mean, he's up, and this is his first shot, and he says that we're going to transform this team. In fact, he said that he's going meet be President Obama in a couple of years when his team wins the Super Bowl and get - takes the trip to the White House.
Host: Is he like father like son?
Guest: No. He said that he doesn't knock out his defense of assistance. That's kind of a Buddy did.
Host: Bill Rhoden, thank you very much.
Guest: Hey, Tony, it's always a pleasure.
Host: That was New York Times sports columnist William C. Rhoden. Bill's books include "Third in the Mile: The Trials and Triumphs of the Black Quarterback." He joined us, as always, from our studios in New York.