Host: We may not know where the money is now, but we definitely know where it isn't. A lot of Jewish charities have lost money that was invested with Bernie Madoff. One was the JET Foundation. It had to shut down entirely, and the JET Foundation was a major source of funding for another nonprofit, Physicians for Human Rights. Frank Donaghue is the CEO. He's on the line now. And welcome to the program. Please tell us about your organization; what does it do? Mr. A. FRANK DONAGHUE (Chief Executive Officer, Physicians for Human Rights): Physicians for Human Rights has been around about 22 years, and we use doctors and health professionals to basically go in and evaluate and examine human-rights violations and bring those to light through advocacy and, hopefully, change in policy. So, you had received a grant from the JET Foundation that, I understand, they could not pay out.
Guest: Correct.
Host: How much money was that?
Guest: $175,000 for the coming year.
Host: And specifically, you used that money in what way?
Guest: Well, most recently, we did a research project where we sent psychologists and medical doctors to meet with former detainees at Abu Ghraib in Guantanamo - doing physical exams, psychological exams, X-rays, bone scans, rectal exams - to see if the stories that they had told were actually true. And the doctors that reviewed the research and did the work said that the story was so gross that they could hardly read all of the report. So, it's that kind of funding that had us put out a report called "Broken Laws, Broken Lives," which is being used in the Congress to investigate the violations of human rights to the folks that have been detained. So, that's the kind of work that the JET Foundation funded that we now have lost.
Host: So, you won't have $175,000 going forward. Is there a way to make up that money?
Guest: Well, I think its individual. I think there's a lot of folks out there from all sides of the table that want to restore our credibility, and they are the people, I think, that ultimately will fund our work. And if I can find about 175 people to give me 1,000 bucks, we'll be able to continue that critical work.
Host: Frank Donaghue is the CEO of Physicians for Human Rights. Thank you very much.
Guest: Thank you.