Host: I am Farai Chideya, and this is News & Notes. Reverend Martin Luther Kings' children are suing each other over the family estate. This year's Emmy nominees are whacking in color, and Italian vogue is breaking barriers with its black issue. Here to get us up to speed is our favorite entertainment guru Allison Samuels of Newsweek magazine. Hey, Allison.
Guest: Hi, how are you doing?
Host: I am doing great. So the children of Martin Luther King Jr. and Coretta Scott King are publicly feuding. Dexter King says he split the family estate with his brother, Martin Luther King III, and his sister, Bernice King, but they say he is keeping a bigger piece of pie. Now, you went to Atlanta, and you were reporting for Newsweek, what were you doing?
Guest: Just trying to find out some of the deeper issues that have gone on because that family had issues for awhile. Because Dexter was the head of the Martin Luther King Foundation, and they had him removed. And this was years ago, before Coretta died, before, you know, the older sister died. So this is not something new. I was trying to get the deeper issues on how they feel. They sort of like Dexter was the favorite son, and that he had more access to the money and to the financial papers of both the mother and the father. So they feel so they have been cheated. And Dexter lives out here in Malibu, you know, a long way from them. And they don't have as much contact. And I think they waited until the older sister died, Yolanda. I think she wouldn't been very happy about this type of public sort of feud. So it's a very tangled weave, I am going have to go down again and really get more information. Because this is really - it's a complex story. It's not something you can sort of do in, you know, a couple of days. It really does go on for years. It has been going on for years. And it sort of culminated with this action lawsuit.
Host: Do you have sense of whether or not people who were of the King's generation - I am talking about Coretta and Martin Jr. are looking at this with, you know, eyes wide open or disgust or panic or any emotion?
Guest: People like Andy Young, I think, are just very disappointed. You know, that is happening, that it is happening on such a public scale that they couldn't have resolved this, you know, one, you know, one on one. You know, being brothers and sisters, being that the mother and sister just died, that they - he feels that they are still grieving, which I think they are. And you know, just sort of make such a, you know, big decision to sue your other, you know, family member. I know it's a really embarrassing to some other people in the civil rights movement. They sort of feel like, you know, this family should be unified particularly this time, when they had major losses over the last couple of years. But you know, money does things to people, loved ones included.
Host: Well, we look forward to seeing and reading more of your reporting. Now let's talk about the Emmys. The awards were announced this week. The AMC drama series "Mad Men" about the New York advertising industry of the early 60s led the pack with 16 nominations. That is the nominations were announced. But like the halls of that fictional advertising firm, the Emmy nominations seem to be lacking in people of color. What's going on?
Guest: Well, as usual, we never - African-Americans have never really been big. I mean, you've had like, you know, the "Grey's Anatomy" where you have people like sort of win, and I think again that actor from that African-American actors from "Grey's Anatomy" is nominated this year as well. But, you know, I think the Emmy has just been notoriously not great for us in terms of we're not on TV as much. There are not a lot of shows that feature us. And it's going to get even worst next season because Gary Dourdan is off of "CSI." Mekhi Pfieffer is leaving "ER." So I think this is probably is as good as this is going get with this one nomination. Because next year is going to be even sort of less, you know, sort of invisible faces of African-Americans on TV. And that's the issue we've been going on through for years. Why we're still talking about it? You know, it's very disappointing and frustrating.
Host: Are there any black actors or actress that you think should have been nominated but weren't?
Guest: You know, I love the show. I love "Girlfriends." I love "The Game." I guess I get frustrated that they don't even get nominated. They don't even - it's things like these, they're not even on the radar when it comes to sitcoms for the Emmy's. And I think that something is frustrating to me. Because I think "Girlfriends" was a really good show and it never got even, you know, a nod the entire time it was on. It the longest - almost the longest running comedy, African-American sitcom on TV next to "Cosby," and I just think it never got that respect. So, even if we're there, I am not sure that the attention is sort of given to us. I don't even know if they watch the CW. You know, and I think about, you know, to our disadvantage.
Host: Well, let's talk about a completely different question, which is what categories there are. Back in 2003, the Emmy's added the Outstanding Reality Competition program. This year there is a new category, Best Reality TV Host. What do you make of adding yet another category particularly in reality TV.
Guest: Well, you know, they have to acknowledge it because it's such big market and it's such huge moneymaker for the television industry. I guess they really couldn't avoid not acknowledging that aspect of it. I am not a big reality TV fan, so it is hard for me to sort of really look at that, but I understand from their standpoint, when something is bringing in that kind of money when the public is so, you know, sort of big on reality TV, how do you not acknowledge it? But again, it is easy for them not to acknowledge African-Americans. So it is very interesting how that works that, you know, but again it all about money. You know, it's like that brings in money, so that's the category.
Host: Well, we talked a little bit about this Italian Vogue that features all black models and it came at the time when really people were talking about. Where are the black people on the runway on the fashion industry? Give us an update on how that's been doing.
Guest: It's been doing great. I mean it's sold out, pretty much all over the country. They're having to do, I think this is their third reprint of it, because they - most of the newsstands that I know usually get like 10 copies, but because of the demand, they were getting a hundred to 200 copies, and they were selling out. On Facebook, they had this big petition saying let's make it the biggest selling Vogue ever and you know, they've a lot, you know, thousands of signatures on that. And I think people sort of took it to their heart, but I still agree with Beth Ann Hardison who said, you know, we love the fact that it is done, but what we want is inclusion, we don't want our separate issue, we want to be a part of regular Vogue, you know. But I think it is a very good message to Vogue that look, people are interested in black models, people will buy those issues. You'll always hear, oh, black models don't sell, or black faces don't sell. And it's like, you know, obviously that's not the case, you know. The interesting part about this Italian Vogue, though is all the ads are white. So it's very jarring when you look at all the black models, and then all the ads are white. So it still gives you that story of, you know, we're not getting this part of the fame, you know, we can get in the magazine doing fashion, but we're not sort of being invested in from, you know, commercial standpoint.
Host: Well, Alison, great to talk to you.
Guest: Thanks so much.
Host: Allison Samuels is an award-winning national correspondent for Newsweek Magazine. She joined us from our NPR Studios in Culver City.