Host: From NPR News, this is News & Notes. I'm Tony Cox. FEMA wants immunity from Class Action lawsuits for its formaldehyde-ridden trailers given to Hurricane Katrina victims. And President Bush is expected to sign a housing bill that once it clears the Senate, will help homeowners in trouble with their mortgages. That and more on today's Reporter's Roundtable. But first, we check in with our very own Farai Chideya coming live from the journalists of color UNITY convention in Chicago. Hey, Farai.
Guest: Hey, Tony.
Host: So listen, for those not in the journalism world, what is Unity?
Guest: Unity is a once-every-four-year gathering of the Ethnic Journalism Associations. So the NABJ, the National Association of Black journalist, the Hispanic Journalist, Asian-American Journalists, Native-American Journalists. It's really this kind of diversity fest for journalism.
Host: Now, this year's theme is a new journalism for a changing world. What does that mean and how has that theme been particularly poignant this year?
Guest: Well, it can be viewed two ways. A changing world is a world where, of course, we talk so much on the show about Barack Obama, but where you do have African-American man who can run for a major political party. You have black executives. You have cell phones. But you have this world that has so many advantages, and I'm very sorry. This is something that I should never, never be caught doing. But there are so many advantages that are going on right now in terms of how we communicate. There is technology, there is the ability to send instantaneous pictures from war zones back into the Unites States and to create blog rings for people who citizen journalism. At the same time, let's be honest. People are losing their jobs.
Host: Absolutely. You know, I know that you're there having a good time part of the time, but I know you're working as well and I understand that yesterday, you had a very exciting day and an interview. What happened?
Guest: It was fabulous. One of our friends at News & Notes, one of our folks from the Reporter's Roundtable, John Yearwood of the Miami Herald, arranged for us to get a private interview with the president of Senegal. And that was wonderful, and we're going to run that next week. He's involved in essentially trying to do some negotiations with the president of Sudan over Darfur and also talks about a lot of the ecological issues that's affecting west Africa. But the best part about it was that the initial part was - were students, and you have these student journalists in this room full of diplomats and you know, a lot of security, big presidential suite, and it was - there was a certain heaviness to the air and certain gravitas. The president speaks English, but sometimes he speaks French and has a translator. And just to see the lights on these students' faces, the student from NABJ and the other ethnic journalism association, that was extraordinary.
Host: It sounds like it was quite something. And we will look forward to hearing that interview. One really quick question before I let you go, and that's when you have a room full of journalist, does anybody get a chance to talk or does everybody talk at the same time.
Guest: Everybody dances.
Host: Farai, thanks for checking in. We'll see you back here next week. Oh, one more thing, Farai? Oh, she's gone. I wanted to wish her a happy birthday. We'll have to do that when she comes back. All right, that was News & Notes host Farai Chideya checking in with us from Chicago, Illinois.