Host: Most Americans don't yet have the choice of working in the green job sector. Some are willing to do whatever they can, wherever they can find work. A few weeks ago, we caught up with one man at an economic crossroads here in southern California. James Smith lost his factory job assembling lawn sprinklers. The housing slump has cut into the yard business. Smith had been at his job for about a year. Now he's out knocking on doors, resume in hand. But with a felony conviction on his record, he is finding those doors aren't opening. I started off by asking him when he got his pink slip.
Guest: They actually told me earlier that month that we would be laid off for December, and that we would return to work in January. It was actually a temporary job, but I was on track to become a permanent employee. And a week later, they came in and said, we no longer need you, and we'll see what happens in January. Truth be told, I'm terrified. I don't think we're coming back. Building is down drastically in this country right now. And if there are no buildings, there are no need for landscape fixtures.
Host: Right. Right. So when will you find out?
Guest: I have no idea. I have no idea at this point.
Host: You're just waiting for a call?
Guest: Any call from anyone, anywhere.
Host: So are you actively out looking for something else more stable?
Guest: On a daily basis.
Host: What are you finding?
Guest: I'm finding nothing. Even the jobs that supposedly no one wants are being filled by PhDs, basically.
Host: Yeah. Now, you've had some tough moments in your life before. You ended up out of the Marine Corps going into addiction, and then going into prison as well. So tell me about how you think some of the things that you went through affected you for better and worse. And what I mean was, you've already been through an incredible journey to pull your life to where it is now. At the same time, doesn't it hurt you when you go for jobs to have a record?
Guest: It hurts me in a number of different ways. One, you know, legally, I guess no one can be honest about it. When I go in to an interview and I tell them that I've been to prison and I ask them with all due sincerity, please, is this going to affect me, and they say no. And I know I'm qualified and a lot of times, overqualified for positions. And I don't get a callback, or I call back and they just won't talk to me at all. It hurts financially, it hurts emotionally. I feel that I'm no longer even an American citizen. I'm unworthy in a way.
Host: Does it also hurt that you are someone who's served the country, you know, in the military and that you're in this position? I mean, do you think - who do you - it sounds like you've taken a lot of responsibility in trying to get out there and take care of yourself. But also, do you think there's anyone else who could be of more help, or who should be of more help to you?
Guest: You know, I would love to say that I know who should be of help, but I don't. I understand how people feel. I understand I've done - I've committed a crime and I don't expect full trust. But I mean, yeah, as a former Marine, I feel as though I basically have been labeled traitor, and I don't know who to ask for help. I go to the different organizations and they say that - they give me advice on how to get a job and send me back out. And it's, you know - I've been out there.
Host: What about your wife? You're married, and so is she trying to encourage you?
Guest: She's trying to. She's trying to. And I don't know if she does it intentionally or not, but every now and then, she'll say something that just hits straight to the bone. And I don't think - I think it's me, I think I'm just becoming a little sensitive and a little tender about it now.
Host: Do you have it in you to deal with this for another month, two months, three months, four months, however long it takes?
Guest: Well, actually, I'm falling back on military training, and the fact is that I have no choice and therefore, it will be.
Host: So you're just going to tough it out.
Guest: I have no other choice.
Host: What if you end up without a home again?
Guest: Then I'll be homeless. I've been considering taking what little money I have and expatriating.
Host: Where would you go?
Guest: Actually, I'm looking at Dubai and Costa Rica and any number of places. Somewhere where someone might overlook the fact that I have made a mistake and will let me show them, as I have for the last ten months working, let me show them that I can do this.
Host: Well, I really appreciate you being so honest and open about your journey, and I think that a lot of people listening will also appreciate the roads that you've walked and what you've offered us today. So let's stay in touch, OK?
Guest: For sure.
Host: All right. Thank you, James.
Guest: Thank you.
Host: That was James Smith. He was laid off and is now working to find work in southern California, or beyond.