Host: Jean Baylor was one half of the R&B duo Zhane, who recorded the early '90s song, "Hey Mister DJ." That hit scored them a 1994 Billboard Music Award for top new R&B artist. Jean took a long break from the music business, but now she's back with her first solo album. It's called "Testimony: My Life Story." Hi, Jean.
Guest: Hi, Farai. How are you?
Host: I am great. So that hit song "Hey Mister DJ" was back in '93. I cannot believe it's been 15 years from then.
Guest: Girl, don't remind me.
Host: I know. But, you know, everybody was out on the floor, and we just - we're hearing a little bit from your new album. You kept yourself out of the spotlight for a while. What were you doing?
Guest: I did. You know, for about seven years or so, I was very much out of the spotlight, just taking time to live life normally. And during that time I got married. So I had some life changes happen, and it really gave me time to grow up a little bit and just have that time to live life away from the entertainment industry and just be a normal person.
Host: Now how do you think the R&B, and club music scenes, have changed since you were part of the group?
Guest: Oh boy, so much has changed. The club scenes, radio, the entire industry as a whole has changed dramatically. Even back then - I mean, I'm not really in clubs right now, but back then, the music that they were playing was different. The accessibility through music and the clubs, and then transitioning into radio was different. Because that's really how "Hey Mister DJ" became such a big hit. A couple of DJs in the clubs loved it, started playing it, and then the next thing you know it was on the radio. And I remember because the label at that time was not really interested in promoting the song. So that's really how it got to mainstream radio, and it just would build and build from there. So it's changed so much now. Regulations and everything has changed. So it's just not as easy to kind of get in those doors.
Host: Now, what made you decide you wanted to go record again?
Guest: You know, well, during that time, that seven year hiatus that I took, another life change that I had was really just kind of recommitting my life to God, and my husband and I both grew up in church. And you know, you kind of do your thing when you go to college, and you got your freedom, you do whatever you want to do, which is also a growing period. But at this time, I was really ready to just make that change, and it was great because it helped me to put things in perspective. It helped to - helped me to really find my purpose, and not to just make music to make music because I have the ability to do so, but because I wanted to say something, and wanted to kind of tell my story and hopefully, you know, encourage somebody along the way.
Host: So what song do you like on this album? What do you find yourself listening to of your own music, that you really vibe with?
Guest: I got a few favorite songs, but I think my number one favorite is "Come Go With Me." What I like about that song is that the instrumentation and the production is so simple, it's just a guitar, and it's an acoustic guitar, a drum programming beat, and these wonderful live strings.
Host: So before we talk anymore about that, let's play a little bit of it.
Guest: (Singing) I want to go to a place Where every dream of mine comes true. And then I look at the stars And pick out one just for you.
Host: You know, it strikes me that in some ways, this album is more like the singer-songwriters like Jill Scott than your previous work as a group. Who do you listen to? Obviously, you have your own sound, but who do you listen to?
Guest: Well, right now I actually haven't been listening to much music. But I have so many influences going back to like the late '70s and '80s. From different gospel artists and R&B, and later on I got into jazz. So it would be so tedious just to say, you know, who my influences are, and who I listen to. But of the current artists, I love D'Angelo, Anthony Hamilton, I think Jill Scott's fantastic, Alicia Keys, John Legend. There's a lot of independent artists out there that are great too. Eric Robeson. So there's so many fantastic artists, and I would probably say that, like you said, I do kind of have my own sound there, which I'm proud of. I mean, I was able to develop over time in the studio with my husband...
Host: Well I know you're a fan of a certain musician named Marcus Baylor, who happens to be your husband.
Guest: Yes.
Host: And helped produce this album. He plays drums in the Grammy award winning jazz quartet The Yellow Jackets, and you occasionally do vocals for their tracks. So what is it like to work with your husband?
Guest: It's really funny. That's my sweetie-pie. It was fun, because, you know, we're spouses, but we're really good friends, and we have a lot of fun together. So, you know, he would go in the studio, and he would, you know, just kind of be working on something, and then I would come downstairs and I would hear it. I was like, I like that, that's really cool. So I would just go in and start vibing, or writing to it, and that's really how the album came to be. He and I actually musically produced and executive produced, just about the entire project. There's two other guys from the area that I live, Scott Booker (ph) and Anthony Bell (ph) that also contributed. But what is also so exciting about this process, Farai, is that my husband and I started our own company, called Be A Light (ph). And the purpose is basically, and it's aim to be a light, but also just so we could have ownership of our product. That's one way that this time around is completely different from being on Motown ten years ago, because this time we bear a lot of brunt of the work, but we will also reap a lot of the rewards in owning. And it's just so liberating as an entrepreneur to say hey, I've created this project, and now I own it. So people that - I always like to tell people that, because they know that when they're buying our product, it's not just - they're supporting me as a singer and songwriter, recording artist, but also as a businesswoman and an entrepreneur as well. So it can be trying sometimes, sometimes you're like, oh my gosh...
Host: I can see, you know, a lot of artists moving in that direction. You know, India Arie just started a label, and I see more and more - I mean, do you think that the commercial pressures on the industry are really, actually, bringing about some business changes where people do say, well, I've go to do my own for myself?
Guest: It is. I think it's forcing the issue, in a sense, because if you talk to almost any major label artist, they're going to tell you some - in some way, how they're unhappy with their situation. They may not want to just pick up and leave and do it independently. But because everything is so closed off, the radio is closed off, the retail's closed off, because the radio is, and it's all this system - the major label system is so broken that it's forcing artists to say, you know what, I'm not just going to lay down and die, but I'm going to create this music that I love, and I'm going to get out there, and I'm going to reach the people one on one. And the Internet, of course, and technology is enabled us to do that. And live performances, where you can just reach out and touch those music listeners, those fans, that like you stuff. So it's not the easiest way to go, but the radio promotions guy that we're working with, he says you know, I think that, at this time, the independent musicians and the independent labels are really going to be what keeps the industry going and kind of recreate it, in a sense.
Host: Oh well, Jean, great to talk to you. Thanks.
Guest: Thank you. So nice talking to you.
Host: And we're going to go out with the sounds of the title track from your album "Testimony." That was singer Jean Baylor. She joined us from the studios of WHYY in Philadelphia. You can watch a video of Jean performing a song from her new album, "Testimony: My Life Story" by going to our blog, nprnewsandviews.org.