Host: From NPR News, this is News & Notes. I'm Tony Cox. Last December, on a cold winter night, an Ecuadorian immigrant walked with his brother through the Bushwood neighborhood in Brooklyn. They huddled together arm in arm when three men jumped out of a passing SUV, hurling ethnic and gay slurs, brandishing beer bottles and a baseball bat. The reported attack left one brother brain dead, his accused killers now facing second degree murder charges as a hate crime. Are incidents like these increasing? The Southern Poverty Center reports the number of hate groups has increased by over 50 percent since 2000. We now turn to Mark Potok, the director of the Southern Poverty Law Center's Intelligence Project to tell us more. Hi, Mark.
Guest: Hi, Tony. How are you?
Host: Listen, people define hate groups in different ways. So two things for you, how does the Southern Poverty Law Center determine if an organization deserves this classification, and what kinds of groups are we talking about here?
Guest: Basically, our definition of a hate group is a group which in its platform statements or in the speeches or writings of its leader says that an entire group of other people by virtue of their group characteristics is somehow less. So in other words, a group that says, you know, all black people are criminals, all white people are blue-eyed devils, all the Jews are whatever, is a hate group by our definition.
Host: Are we talking then about the Klan, Nazi skinheads, something different and new perhaps?
Guest: Yeah. I mean, the choices - we take in quite a range of groups clan, the Nazi groups, other kinds of white nationalist groups by which I mean, generally more kind of the suit-and-tie crowd than you'll find with the clan in the skinheads. But we also include some very extreme anti-gay groups, some radical traditionalist Catholic groups, these are groups that believe that Jews are evil and so on, murdered God and what have you, and a number of other groups along those lines.
Host: What's driving this growth in the numbers of hate groups? Is it the economy, social forces, a combination of both perhaps?
Guest: I think all of those things. During the last eight years or so, most of the period, these groups have very successfully and almost exclusively exploited the issue of illegal immigration. In other words, every clan group, neo-Nazi group out there has kind of put aside all other enemies to concentrate heavily on the so-called threat of people with brown skin coming here, to you know, kind of rape our daughters and destroy our society. That has begun to change in just the last year, especially since last fall when we had two major things going on, of course, the economy crashing and unemployment in particular getting worse and then of course, the election of a black man to the White House. Those things together have really created kind of perfect storm.
Host: Are the number of hate crimes and the number of hate groups increasing on a parallel track?
Guest: It's impossible to know - is the bottom line on hate crimes, I say that because the national hate crime statistics that are collected by the FBI are so fraught with problems, reporting problems and other kinds of errors that every statistician understands that you simply cannot say, hate crimes are going up or down. But what we know is this, the hate crimes stats show or range at the twin about 6,000 and 10,000 incidents per year, going all the way back to '92 when they first were compiles. You know, it's just bounced up and down between those two figures. But very - well, quite recently, a couple of years ago, the Department of Justice came out with a very important study which did this very serious analysis and concluded that the real level of hate crimes both reported and unreported to the police was actually a little over 190,000 incidents per year. In other words, almost 20 to 30 times the number the FBI is reporting. So we don't know if they're going up or down but we know there are great many of them.
Host: Our time has run out. But very, very quickly, 10 seconds or less, can you say whether or not you would expect that the new administration, the Obama administration will tackle this in a new way?
Guest: I don't really know how they can tackle it in a new way. It's simply a continuing problem out there that we've got to deal with and a problem which may well get worse with a black man in the Oval office and the economy going essentially to pot.
Host: Mark, thank you very much.
Guest: And thank you.
Host: That was Mark Potok, the director of the Southern Poverty Law Center's Intelligence Project which published its Year In Hate report last week.