Host: Earlier in the show, we talked about the importance of the arts, even in an economic downturn. Well, that's a subject dear to the heart of music impresario Quincy Jones. Jones learned early on about the impact American artists have, not only on the country, but on the world. In the mid-'50s, Jones was part of the Dizzy Gillespie Big Band, and the State Department sent them on a goodwill tour around the globe. It was during the Cold War, and President Eisenhower wanted to spread the ideals of American democracy as a weapon against communism. As part of our Living Legends series, this is Quincy Jones on life as a representative of American culture.
Guest: We were in a kamikaze black band. We went to Ibadan, to Tehran, when the shah was in there in '56, you know, and then we left for Damascus, Karachi, even in Iraq, Bangladesh, Dacca, Beirut, Ankara, Istanbul; the young rebels from Cyprus were throwing stones at the U.S. embassies. Hit the Gillespie band over there, the kamikaze band... We were there the - two days from Ankara, Turkey. And we played the concert in Athens. All of those student rebels were in on us. They rushed the stage after we finished, scared us to death. They put Dizzy on their shoulder and they were saying, Dizz-y(ph), Dizz-y, because music has the power in all of us, it's different. Then we went into Beirut. We saw, oh, my God, it must have been 10,000 people there looking for Dizzy. You have to go to know; that's all I'm trying to say, really. To see how the world is operating on simultaneously is the most fascinating thing in the world. I've been lucky, I think, because I got a chance to get out of the country when I was 19 with Lionel Hampton and Ben Webster, you know, the jazz saxophone player? I talk a lot and - but I used to listen when I was young, a lot. And I never had a mother, so I had to listen, you know? And Ben Webster said, young blood, every country you go to, eat the food the people eat, listen to the music they listen to, and learn 30 or 40 words in every language, because music, food and language is the soul of a country, you know? That's why I'm so anxious for us to get a secretary of the arts or a minister of culture, if you will, you know, because our music is the most widely imitated music on the planet. When Ben said that about learning - when Webster said about learning the language, I've taken it very seriously, you know? I studied Serbo-Croatian, Farsi and Iranian - you want to get pimp-slapped, you call an Iranian Arabic. I am Persian; I'm not Arabic... And I speak Farsi, you know? And Turkish, Greek, French, Swedish, Russian; I've studied Katakami(ph) in Japan. I'm studying Mandarin now, writing and speaking Mandarin, and Arabic. But I'll - it's the most incredible experience in the world to learn - or just - you start with a few, and you start to draw, and after awhile you just don't have to drag your culture into everybody else's culture, and that's been one of our problems, you know, is trying to make everybody like us.
Host: You're listening to the musings of music impresario Quincy Jones. Today, Jones is a man of the world, traveling constantly and mingling with the rich and famous. But he didn't start out that way. He was born in Chicago in 1933; that's where he was first introduced to music and to life's hard knocks.
Guest: And man, believe me, Chicago makes Compton and Harlem look like Boys Town. They don't play, as you can see now... With the government. They don't play; they never did play. It has been the spawning ground for gangsters since beginning of the country. And it's at a stockyard in the middle of town, when we were little kids, you know, and all I saw were Tommy Guns and stogies and piles of money, dead bodies everywhere... Dudes hanging on lampposts and there were ice picks in their necks, two (unintelligible) gun-shooting kids in the back, you know, teachers getting killed in the hallways every day. And there we played. I got my own metals there(ph). I went to the wrong street, they nailed my hand with a switchblade to the fence. I didn't know how to interpret it. My daddy hit him in the head with a hammer and all that. So, I was on the wrong street. He used to send us down to Louisville to stay with my grandmother, who was an ex-slave in a shotgun shack, and we always kidded and say my grandmother's summer villa. No heat, no water, no electricity, kerosene lamps, coal stove and all that stuff, you know. My grandma was born French and Cherokee, African, French and Cherokee. My grandfather was running a brothel for some white dudes down there, and at one point, they wanted to put my mother and all of her sisters in the brothel house. He stole a car and took them to St. Louis, you know? That's the way it was back then. One of the biggest painful things in my life now is that this country, the kids, especially the black kids, don't have a clue about their culture, not a clue. Because you can go - get to where you're going if you know where you came from, you know, from gospel, to blues, jazz, all of it, that nobody meant - no one person invented gospel. It's a sociological result, you know, of a really painful existence, you know? So, it's a sociological phenomenon. But now, it hurts me to see that everybody in the world has adopted our music as theirs (unintelligible), everywhere, I mean, without fail, you know, whether it's Jimmy's in Monte Carlo or Rio, Cairo, wherever, Shanghai. I've been to all these places three times in the last two years. I asked a kid in Seattle, little brother, what do you thought about Louis Armstrong? He said, I heard his name. I said, what do you think about Charlie Parker, Coltrane, Duke Ellington? He said, I don't know who they are. It hurts, it really hurts. This is all about our lives in this country, you know? It's a society that gets rejected and we say, to hell with it, we'll build our own society, you know? And that's - it's been like that all the way, you know, since Louis Armstrong. To me, I look at life through my core skill, which is orchestrator, arranger and composer and all. And beginning with four trumpets, four trombones, five saxes, piano, bass, drum and guitar, that's what makes every big band happen. And it's the power of music, you know; it's just as absolute just like mathematics are, but music is the only thing that affects the left and right brain simultaneously. And it's fascinating, and you have to just constantly keep nosy.
Host: The one and only Quincy Jones. He has a new book out; it's called "The Complete Quincy Jones: My Journey & Passions: Photos, Letters, Memories and More from Q's Personal Collection." That's News & Notes. Glad you could be with us. Nicole Childers, Christabel Nsiah-Buadi and Geoffrey Bennett produced the show. Sasa Woodruff is the editor, and Sonata Lee Narcisse directs. The technical director is Sherene Strausberg. Marcia Caldwell is our drive engineer. The News & Notes staff includes Roy Hurst, Geoffrey Gardner, Devin Robbins, Allison Samuels, Zachary Slobig, Joanne Griffith and Drew Tewkesbury. To listen to the show or subscribe to the podcast, visit our Web site, nprnewsandnotes.org. To join the conversation or sign up for the newsletter, visit our blog at nprnewsandviews.org. News & Notes was created by NPR News and the African-American Public Radio Consortium. On Monday, General Motors posts historic fourth-quarter losses and plans to lay off tens of thousands more. Is that well-traveled path to the black middle class closed for good? I'm Tony Cox. This is News & Notes.