Host: And now it's letter time. Our editor Sasa Woodruff is here with me. Hey, Sasa.
Guest: Hey Farai, how's it going?
Host: I am great. So, what are listeners filling our inbox with this week?
Guest: We got a few letters about the interview you did with Rick Warren this week. Celine Welch(ph) in Fort Worth, Texas, wrote into say she was a fan of the show, but not of the interview you did with the influential pastor.
Host: Celine wrote, you began by asking him about rumors that McCain may have heard the first part of the show. Regardless of what he said, there was no way for Warren to know what was happening with McCain while Warren was on stage. What you should have asked was, why did you tell the audience at the beginning of the forum that McCain was in a cone of silence when in fact he was in a motorcade on the way to the church. That's something Warren needs to account for.
Guest: Then Thomas Tenhave(ph) in Philidelphia, Pennsylvania, had a different take on the interview. But he still thought we missed some topics. Farai Chideya did an excellent job interviewing Rick Warren, however, as with most of the media, it rarely hones in on misstatements. Ms. Chideya failed to ask Mr. Warren why social justice concerns were such a low priority, that they weren't raised because he ran out of time. Really? Once again, social justice takes a back seat to abortion, foreign affairs, and gay marriage. So much for Mr. Warren's attempts to separate himself from the Christian right.
Host: This month we're doing a series on addiction. Listener Anise Rice(ph) wrote in to say...
Guest: Thanks again for tackling a subject that is often times neglected for discussion. But all too often it's the source of so much pain and misery in our community. When a family member suffers from an addiction, the entire family suffers. Emotionally, socially, and financially. Shows like yours help to bring the stigma of addiction out of the shadows.
Host: As part of that series, we talked to a mother who said that she believed her son committed suicide because of the game EverQuest. While I tried to challenge our guest on that direct link, we decided to ask the game's maker for a response. Here's some of the statement from Sony Online Entertainment.EverQuest is a phenomenally popular game because it provides players with a fun, social, and interactive online experience. EverQuest is a game. The majority of the hundreds of thousands of subscribers play the game in moderation. As with any form of entertainment, it is the responsibility of each individual player to monitor his or her own playing habits, and prioritize his or her time as necessary.
Guest: And finally, Aljore Stallings(ph) in Glen Burnie, Maryland, wrote in about the interview we did with Cullen Jones. If you'll remember, he's the second African-American swimmer to win a gold at the Olympics.
Host: She wrote, I am giving you praise and kudos for your interview of Cullen Jones. I am so glad to hear of a black person achieve success in a sport that isn't traditionally the norm for black folks. I do hope it encourages more young black people to look into learning to swim. It has encouraged me a whole lot.
Guest: Thank you for your letters. We want to encourage you to keep the comments coming,
Host: To write us just log on to npr.org and click on Contact Us. When you get there you'll see lots of shows to choose from. Make sure you pick News and Notes when you write to us.
Guest: And be sure to tell us where you're writing from, and how to pronounce your name.
Host: Thanks, Sasa.
Guest: No problem.