Host: From NPR News, this is News and Notes. I'm Tony Cox. As President Obama pitches his economic rescue plan directly to the American people, the country is reeling from record jobs losses last month. One state is forcing workers to stay home two days a month with no pay, and federal regulator shut down three more banks over the weekend. We've got author and economist Dr. Julianne Malveaux here with us to dissect the latest in the economic news. Hello, Dr. Malveaux.
Guest: Hi, Tony. How are you?
Host: Well, I'm glad to have a job. I'll put it that way.
Guest: You know, that's a good thing.
Host: Businesses and institutions have now shed jobs for the last 13 months in a row. Last month alone, we lost nearly 600,000 jobs. Nissan is the latest to announce big cuts. President Obama, Dr. Malveaux, has warned of double digit unemployment rates. It seems like everytime I have you on the show we ask the same question. How high is unemployment going to go?
Guest: Well, the rate we're going it can get to double digit. The last time we've seen anything like that was in 1981 in the early Reagan years. And double digit unemployment is no joke, but Tony, many people believe that we have really already crossed the line. If you look at the most recent report from the Bureau of Labor statistics, they come up with these alternative measures. So, we know that the unemployment rate is 7.6 percent. But then if you add people who are marginally attached, that's like people who are working part time, but want to work full time and people who are discouraged workers and have dropped out of the labor force, we get up to a number that's more like 14 percent, 13.9 percent. So when we look at all the hidden unemployment, we're already well firmly into that double digit area.
Host: You know, we keep hearing this dismal job reports but also that the news is quote, "worse than many economists expected," end quote. Does that include you? This is worst than what you expected?
Guest: No, because, you know, first of all, I'm in North Carolina where everything that you've talked about, the furloughs, the layoffs - we've been seeing some of that stuff for a while. Secondly, I tend to be somewhat pessimistic about some of these numbers. So, you know, the basic forecast that most economists had out on Friday, the report comes out at 8:30 in the morning, and they were saying 7.5 and so it was 7.6. I figured that it would be something, you know, between 7.5 and eight. And you know, it's - we have - our labor market is hemorrhaging jobs because there is no money out there because, you know, I think that the Congress is fiddling while Rome burns in terms of the stimulus package. They were much more generous when it came to the bail out for banks than they have been when it's come for - to human beings. So I don't think it's going to get better, A, until we get some money in the pipeline and some jobs in the pipeline. I think cities and states, especially places like California, would want to start running proposals by their Congress people about ways they can put people back to work quickly.
Host: Well, let's talk about some of these banks and proposals that will help. The Obama administration is contemplating as a next step creating the so-called bad bank to store all of those toxic assets. I want to ask you how it works, but also to talk a little bit about the background on this because I remember the Resolution Trust Corporation, as I'm sure you do in1980s after the failed savings and loan debacle. Is this the same kind of thing, and did it work then and would it work now?
Guest: It's the same concept as getting the junk, if you will, out of the mainstream financial sector and putting it somewhere where the government buys the asset and holds it perhaps sells it or scrubs it up. As you remember with RTC, they were banks, you know, banks were for sale pretty much and they were pretty undervalued. The challenge with that is valuing a bad asset. In other words, if you got a bank that they think is worth, you know, a hundred million dollars, the fact of the matter is a stock is worth maybe $70 or $60 million, they're going to try to get as much as they can from the government. And the government ought to give them as little as they can. And so, you really end up spending a lot of time dithering and bickering about what it's worth. The math is this, so the government pays them less, when bank recovers, the taxpayers get more, but obviously these bankers want to cover their backs. So RTC costs us a lot of money, the Resolution Trust Corporation cost the taxpayers a lot of money. And if we were to go to a bad bank strategy, I predict it'll cost us a lot of money.
Host: You know, the FDIC shut down three more banks over the weekend, two in California, another in Atlanta, Georgia. Are we still seeing, well, obviously we are because of what I just said, but do you anticipate even more bank foreclosings?
Guest: There is a possibility. We still have not seen the kind of bank foreclosures that we saw, you know, in the '80s with the RTC, with the saving and loan. And we certainly haven't seen anything like we saw in the 1930s. I believe the number of banks having closed is something under 40 so far, and then many of them are small banks. That doesn't make it any better especially for someone who is a depositor in one of those banks. But this is not of the crisis proportion that it could be. We do have many safeguard against bank closures. However, I expect again, we'll probably see a hundred banks close. They will probably smaller regional banks, but some of them maybe larger banks, you know. We have some challenges already with, of course, Bank of America and their merger with Merrill Lynch. And there maybe some other large banks that are going to be challenged.
Host: There's a voice that we have not heard a lot from lately and I want to ask you about it. I'm talking about fed chief Ben Bernanke. He seems to have all but disappeared from the headlines. Why is that we aren't hearing more from him as the stimulus package gets debated?
Guest: Well, Bernanke's role is to manage U.S. monetary policy - what does money cost, bank regulations, all that stuff. So frankly he doesn't have very many arrows in his quiver yet left. He's got - I think we're down to, you know, under one percent for the federal funds rate. So there's not a lot of pontificating around interest rates that Bernanke can do. He ought to be of greater voice around the stimulus especially around as you - strategy, the bad bank strategy you mentioned. I believe that what he's doing really is letting the Obama economic team get their feet wet. Very, very soon we ought to be hearing that he and the Treasury secretary have met. He's not an Alan Greenspan. If you think back to 1992 when Clinton was elected, Greenspan immediately jumped out there and was almost a jockeying between Greenspan and Clinton. And Greenspan made it clear, hey, I'm the money guy, I'm in charge of this, guys. And he, you know, he went to the White House, he had very long meeting with Clinton. It's been written about by - it's been written about it, you know, the Washington Post reporter has written extensively about that meeting, Carl F - Bernstein.
Host: Bernstein.
Guest: Yeah, he's written about that. So, you know, Greenspan was much more one to position himself as aggressive. If we think about Bernanke, Bernanke has been in the role now for under two years or about two years. I wouldn't say that he hasn't gotten his feet wet, but I would say that he doesn't have the aggression than Greenspan had and in many ways that's good. But you're certainly right that his name, we aren't hearing from him. But I would expect it would be discordant if within the next couple of weeks as the Obama economic team comes together, it would be discordant if we did not see some photos of Bernanke going to the White House sitting with a Treasury secretary, sitting with Summers, and doing some of that. If he hasn't done something like that in the next two years - two weeks, he's very much abdicating his role.
Host: Let's talk about what some of the states are trying to do. You know that the president went to the Midwest today to try to pitch his stimulus plan. Out here in California though things are as bad as they are any place in the country, if not worse, and as result of that California is one of those places where the unemployment rate is higher than the national average. And there is a new system here now called Furlough Fridays. The governor has ordered state workers to take every other Friday off without pay. It's already affected the DMV, the Office of Emergency Services. Is this going to be spreading around the country, do you think?
Guest: Well, the furlough is a way of keeping people in their jobs and giving them a pay cut. So, if you take two days off a month, that's a 10 percent out of - an average of 20 working days in a month, that's a 10 percent roughly pay cut. And what he's doing is spreading the pain around rather than to say, let's cut x number of jobs, which is, you know, cut x number of hours. This is consistent with the trend that we see nationally, that the number of hours worked per week is down, just a touch, not much, but just a touch. And I do expect that cities are going to - cities and states are going to have to be imaginative. Here in North Carolina, the public universities, blessedly not the private ones, but the public have had to take a seven percent cut, which means my neighbors at North Carolina A&T and my neighbors at UNC Greensboro are having to cut at least a hundred jobs in each case. So, you know, rather than to have to physically cut jobs, you know, keep people employed. So it's not a bad idea. It's uncomfortable obviously for everyone, but it's a way to share the pain.
Host: Let's bring the conversation to a close with this. We're seeing pictures today of people standing in lines in Chicago, in Atlanta, trying to get a few jobs that are being offered. You're at a university, and it's coming up on the spring when people will be graduating, some with degrees in business, et cetera. Really briefly, Dr. Malveaux, what are you telling your graduates about what they should do with a job market as dismal as this one is?
Guest: As dismal as a job market is, people are being hired every day. I mean, you still have some turn in the labor market, so people are being hired. I tell my students be prepared. Have that resume, make sure it's perfect, absolutely perfect, and that goes for everyone. Use your network, network like crazy, and follow up with people as quickly as you can. Standing outside is one way to get a job but, you know, making telephone calls inside is another. Be wary of the Internet. A lot of people are, you know, trying to find jobs on the Internet and they're putting out a lot of their personal information, you know, social security numbers and other things. And that's just an invitation for some crazy desperate people to do identity theft. So be careful about what you put out there, but be as forceful as you can and get back to people as professional as you can. Get back to people as quickly as you can. If people offer you interviews at inconvenient times, too bad, just do it because these jobs are hard to come by. They are there, but they're hard to come by.
Host: And I imagine that there's no major really that is the one, that is recession-proof, is there?
Guest: There really isn't. There really isn't. I mean, in education, there are some opportunities. You know, social services of course are being cut. Business is being cut. But there are pockets of opportunity in everything. The other thing I've told students about - to our listening audience…
Host: It's going to be really fast.
Guest: Don't be afraid to take something part time.
Host: Alright, that's good. Don't be afraid to take something part time. Dr. Malveaux, thank you very much.
Guest: Thank you, Tony.
Host: That was author and economist, Dr. Julianne Malveaux. She is also the president of Bennett College.