Host: Theirs was an unlikely romance. She was a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist and he was a career soldier devoted to his unit. But their love blossomed despite the differences. In 2005, Dana Canedy's fiance, Charles King, was deployed to Iraq. He started writing a journal to their infant son in case he didn't make it home. First Sergeant Charles King was later killed by a roadside bomb. Dana Canedy turned King's 200-page journal to his young son into a memoir called "A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor." I talked to Dana about her new book and started by asking her to describe the kind of woman she was when she met Charles.
Guest: When I met Charles - a dear, wonderful man who turned out to be the love of my life, and I certainly didn't think he was going to be the love of my life when I met him - I was pretty immature, very career oriented. And then I met this gentle, kind warrior - is the only way to describe him - a military man. And he changed me, just his gentleness and his grace and his loyalty. And it took me years to believe he was really as good as he turned out to be. And we had a wonderful eight years together in between the times I broke up with him.
Host: Yeah, you guys seem - I mean, first of all, the book is very evocative about your relationship and then later your relationship to your child, his relationship to your child. But it seems to me that you, kind of, you, like, you know, the military obstacle courses - you kind of put him through one of those.
Guest: I put the brother through it. Yes, I did. You know, my father was a drill sergeant in the military. And I just never wanted to marry a military man. I grew up near military bases. And you know, so here comes this military guy. And I thought, oh, my gosh. Plus he was father's friend. And I thought, well, what girl wants to be with her father's friend? And I didn't want a military man. And it was the best thing. Being with him was the best decision I ever made. He taught me so much about honor and dedication and loyalty. He truly was an amazing person. But as I say in the book - it's called "A Journal for Jordan." It's literally written to my son. I don't want my son who's two years old - our son, Jordan - to think his father was a saint. He wasn't. And, you know, I'm not perfect. And so I talk about our flaws and the flaws in our relationship. But I'll tell you, it was a really beautiful relationship, and losing him broke me inside. And so now I'm at a place where I'm trying to live with my grief with some measure of dignity and to show my - to demonstrate to my son that even in the face of tragedy, you can go on to reclaim your life and reclaim your happiness. And that's what his father would have wanted for us.
Host: The journal is very literal.
Guest: Yes.
Host: What is the journal and what was that about?
Guest: When I was five months pregnant - we actually decided to have the baby because he was going to Iraq. And I was turning 40 years old, and we felt like we were running out of time to have a child together. So we made the decision to do that. And then also he might not come back from Iraq. And so we decided not to wait until he came back. And thank God I got pregnant with our son. And he left when I was five months pregnant for the war. In the entire time he was gone from before our baby was born, he was writing a journal to him. He would go out on his missions during the day, come back into his bunk in Iraq in the evenings after his missions, and he would write to our son, even before Jordan was born, as I say. And he wrote life lessons. He wanted Jordan to know what his values were, what he believed in, if he didn't come home to raise him himself. And so he told him everything from how to treat a woman, to the power of prayer, to practical things like hide money in your shoe on vacation. Anything he could think of. He told him his favorite bible verses. He told him why he loved me, why he wanted a son. And it's just a guide that will help me raise my child.
Host: You are someone who is so incredibly accomplished. You were part of a Pulitzer Prize-winning team from the New York Times. I mean, you were part of that, and at the time that you and Charles were trying to figure out what you wanted. What would you say to other people, particularly black women, but just all women who are trying to decide, well, do I need a guy who's a little more, you know, polished, a little more urbane? Because you had to make a choice.
Guest: That is just such an important question, and I think one that people answer in different ways as they walk through their lives and mature a little bit. You know, in my 20s I wanted a guy who wore the suit and, you know, read the Wall Street Journal, and so forth. And that was - it was selfish, it was egotistical, it was immature. I was still a good person, but I just had this image of what I wanted. And what I realized over time and actually from being with this man is that character is what matters. And I tell you, once I made the decision to look at him for who he was, this man with strength and honesty and decency, it became a love like I've never known. I mean, this is a man who didn't make a lot of money but gave me every dime he had for our baby. This is a man who when I said I'd like to have a child, said, absolutely, let's do it. I've been waiting for you to be ready. He, you know, if I would wake up coughing in the middle of the night, he'd get up and get me water. He just - he loved me for who I am. I could gain weight, lose weight, cut my hair, you know, grow my hair. None of that mattered. What mattered to him was the person inside, and there's no greater love than that.
Host: At the same time, you have a very honest assessment in the book about what it means for a man in the military, like Charles, to prioritize his unit. Do you feel in the end that he made the right decision to prioritize, to take some risks, ultimately one that cost his life?
Guest: You know, I don't have a definitive answer for that. And one day I'm going to have to answer that question for my son. And one day - you know, I say to myself, yes, he made the right decision because he was such a warrior. And if he had let someone else take the risks that he took that ultimately killed him by the improvised explosive device, he wouldn't have come back the same man. On the other hand, I look at my little boy who's starting to ask, where's my daddy? And he's two years old. And I'm having to try to explain that to him. And it breaks my heart. And I think, my gosh, you shouldn't have gone on that mission. It was a volunteer mission. And he had gone on dozens, maybe hundreds of them, in the year that he was gone. And so personally I wish he hadn't done that. On the other hand it was because he did it that he was who he was, that he - you know, you can say somebody has honor and loyalty and commitment and dignity, but he demonstrated it. I mean, one of the other ways he did that was - and this really angered me - was his decision not to come home when our baby was born. He had just been at war three months. And he was a first sergeant. He was a leader of a lot of men, and many of them were young. And he ultimately decided that he couldn't leave them in battle. They were just getting acclimated. But he had promised me he was going to come home. And that really, really affected our relationship for a time. And I had to make peace with it. And ultimately I did.
Host: And he did get to see Jordan, and they got to spend some quality time together. And then once he went back, he - with very little time left on the clock before he would have come home - he was the victim of an attack and...
Guest: Yes.
Host: You investigated what happened. Why did you do that?
Guest: You know, I had to know. I had to know to be able to make peace with it and go on with my life and maybe even answer for - answer questions for my son one day. I had to know the truth. And I had to know that happened. And the other thing is I could not just bury him and go on with my life and go back to work. I had all of this stuff inside of me - anger, pain, fear, anxiety - and I was either going to do something positive with it or something negative with it. And I think that that's true for many people in life when you're struggling with something so painful and so overwhelming and so fearful that, you know, you have one or two ways to go. And what I decided to do was to turn all of that energy into a positive direction and write this book and try to share with people some lessons that I learned. And one is the importance of communicating with your family, of speaking to your family, writing about how much you love them before time runs out. We're an example of that. And I also wanted a way for my son to really know his father, and I wanted to share Charles and his spirit and his legacy with as many people who care to read the book. And I hope people do because I do think it's a remarkable story, not just because it's my story - it's actually the story I'd never wanted to tell because that would mean he's home. But I had to do this.
Host: So what's next for you? What are you - I mean, besides raising Jordan - what do you see is your path?
Guest: It's interesting because I've always been someone who's been sort of focused on career and had my eye on the next thing ahead. And right now I just want to linger in this moment with my son who looks so much like his father and brings so much joy to me. I don't know what's next. I honestly have no answer for that. I'm taking it one day at a time. And you know, I'm still grieving really, really badly. I'm happier than I was a year ago, but I - for the first time in my life I'm not worried about tomorrow. I'm just living in the moment. Because one of the things that Charles's death showed me is that you only have this moment. Time is not guaranteed to us. And I know that's so often a cliche, but I really am trying to live that now.
Host: Dana, I'm so glad that we got a chance to talk. Thank you.
Guest: Thank you so much.
Host: That was Dana Canedy. She's the author of "A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor." She joined us from NPR studios in New York.