Host: Millions of people have their own personal laundry list of what they want from an Obama administration. So what big issues, if any, do black Americans share as top priorities? And how will the incoming administration deal with them? Joining us now we've got Clarence Page, a columnist with the Chicago Tribune. Hi, Clarence.
Guest: Hi Farai, how are you?
Host: Oh, I'm doing great. So we're going to dig into these issues deeper. But this is really just a quick tour. Health care. The two nominees battled over this issue. Senator Obama focused on expanding, access to health care and a plan that could have cost up to 65 billion dollars by some estimates. Do you think A, this is a priority that a lot of members of the African-American community want to see dealt with and B, is there any money to deal with it? Or will there be any money to deal with it?
Guest: Well the answer to A is yes, because African-Americans disproportionately are in greater need of health care. We currently have health coverage, of course government health coverage for seniors and for the indigent, those below the poverty line. But the working poor and middle-class folks often get caught in the crunch, especially now in these economically troubled times. Issues like portability, I don't think I can take it from one job to another, or having care when you lose your job. Those are very important and were a very high priority in the campaign. Barack Obama's campaign was launched on the anti-war issue, but health care soon took center stage and - which gets us to question B. Can we afford it? And that sort of answer is no. Right now in the short term the government is deeply into debt with the bailout package - current bailout package. Possibly more bailout actions pending. The economy may well get worse before it gets better. So Barack Obama has to make some decisions here as to how to deal with this very important issue for him. Will he try early on to take measures that will put us on the path to a full out debate on this issue, or will he hold off for a while and tackle the other bigger economic issues first?
Host: One of the things that came up is the idea that you could pay for things like this healthcare plan by rolling back the Bush administration's tax cuts for people who earned a quarter of a million dollars or more. Is there the political power, I guess, within Senator Obama and within the Democratic-led legislative branch to really roll back those tax cuts?
Guest: It looks like there is. Obama seems to have a mandate for that. That issue also took center stage in the debate, and the Bush tax cuts have long been a thorn in the sides of the Democrats and of our nation's fiscal health, for that matter. You remember John McCain opposed Bush tax cuts initially and only began to support them as he got closer to running for president. And because they do appeal to conservatives, to Republicans in general, except for the fiscal conservatives, who are much more concerned about balancing the budget. So I think he's got the mandate to do that. And like any other budgetary decision, now it's a question of rolling back those tax cuts, and that's all - mainly what he would do would be to resume the cuts. In other words, the Bush tax cuts expire in 2010, and he could just essentially let them expire as far as those who are above a quarter million dollars a year income. That's far enough down the road that it makes it even more politically easy to take the steps now.
Host: All right. Let's turn to education. Senator Obama has said he wants to reform No Child Left Behind, and that's the education law that President Bush enacted in 2002.
Guest: Right.
Host: And the Obama campaign literature said that reform, quote, "starts by funding the law." What did that mean?
Guest: That means they want to have it both ways. I think what President-elect Obama's been speaking to here is the unpopularity of No Child Left Behind with a lot of people, teachers' unions, with a lot of ordinary citizens who think it imposes too much of the federal level on the states. However, there is a popular aspect of No Child Left Behind in that it calls for accountability by the schools. The District of Columbia School Superintendent Michelle Rhee - who played a role, unintended, in the third presidential debate when the issue of education vouchers and all came up - she has said that even though she supports Obama, she's really frightened, she said, of his statements about No Child Left Behind because she appreciates the accountability aspects of that law. So I think we're going to see a bit more debate about No Child Left Behind before it's just done away with completely. And also, who will be the new secretary of education? There's been rumors that Colin Powell might take the job. Those might just be rumors, but somebody like him would certainly favor accountability, and Barack Obama has also spoken for accountability in the past.
Host: All right. One last question and it's going to have to be quick. MR. PAGE: OK. Yesterday, Keith Reid, who is one of our regular economics contributors, said that there could be a new New Deal, meaning the government will create jobs directly. Do you think that's possible?
Guest: You know, I tend to - well, it's certainly popular with Democrats, the idea of public works, and it's already worked in Chicago, Obama's adopted home town. Mayor Daley's gotten a long way with that. But I suspect he may be kind of a new frontier kind of president, at least initially, and that's the John F. Kennedy model, where he raised the morale of the country and rallied people together for joint action to tackle common problems instead of coming out with public works programs.
Host: All right. Clarence, thank you.
Guest: Thank you.
Host: That was Clarence Page, columnist for the Chicago Tribune.