Host: He's not even the president yet, but Barack Obama has won a victory in Congress. The Senate has cleared the way for him to spend another $350 billion in TARP money. And in his pitch to senators, Mr. Obama promised to channel that money towards homeowners and to credit markets. He also promised to demand better accountability by the companies who are receiving these funds. I'm joined now by NPR news analyst Juan Williams. And Juan, with the Democrats controlling Congress, was this outcome ever in doubt, even though Mr. Obama is not officially the president yet?
Guest: Well, you know, it was in doubt to this extent: Barney Frank, who's the head of the banking committee in the House, really was concerned that there was not sufficient emphasis on putting money in the hands of people who are threatened by foreclosure, that what you need here to do, with the second segment of the money, is make sure you don't repeat the errors that took place with the first half, where you had the Treasury secretary, Henry Paulson, constantly changing on the move because he found that the credit markets weren't being loosened even though all this money was being deposited. This effort remains very unpopular with the American people. So, even though you had a Democratically controlled House and Senate, it wasn't sure that this money would be approved.
Host: What did you learn about Mr. Obama's style by the way he went about getting this vote in favor of this?
Guest: Well, you know what? It's interesting. I think it's almost Rahm Emanuel's style. Rahm Emanuel, of course, is a former House member and now White House chief of staff. And in this situation what he was sending out as a message to the members was Democrats who are in charge, do you want it on your conscience and on your voting record that you stopped an effort to prevent economic collapse in this country? So, he played real hardball in order to get it done.
Host: OK. So, one story that got kind of lost amongst all this Washington news this week was the appointment of former Illinois Attorney General Roland Burris to fill the Senate seat vacated by President-elect Obama. And just to note that Burris did vote for the release of the second half of the TARP fund. And he was the choice of Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich. How much will the fact that he was this disgraced governor's choice, how far will that affect his work in the Senate?
Guest: Well, he is the junior senator from the state of Illinois, and he's the most junior senator right now in the U.S. Senate. So, his work is going to be, I think, at the lower end. I don't think you're going to notice much about him, but here's the key thing, Madeleine. Is he running in 2010? If he's running in 2010, he's going to be not in Washington, but in Illinois most of the time, trying to build up his image. Remember, this is the guy that has run for Senate before; he's even run for mayor of Chicago unsuccessfully. So, he has a lot of work to do if he's trying to hold that seat. One the other hand, if he was to announce, no, I'm not running for reelection, and just simply serve the people of Illinois, I think he would get a different kind of reception from his colleagues in the Senate.
Host: All right. Finally, Juan, I can't let you go away without telling us what your plans are this weekend. This is a big weekend in Washington. The inauguration is on Tuesday.
Guest: You know, I get a ton of invitations because of what I do for NPR. And my instinct is to remember that for the Bush and Clinton inaugurals, there were lines out the yazoo... I mean, to put it politely, because security is so intense these days. They've got so much security, and you know, the ladies are all in their gowns and the men in their tuxedos and they're stuck outside waiting to get through security. Once you get in...
Host: And it's freezing, right?
Guest: It is freezing right now. You wouldn't believe it. And then you get in, the president and the first lady might dance for five or 10 minutes. But they've got to go to a dozen locales, and they've got to do it, basically, between 8:30 and midnight. But there's some events around here. There're lots of, kind of, social events, you know, with tremendous superstars coming. So, it's an amazingly highly charged and emotional weekend, and I think I'll be busy, Madeleine.
Host: You will. So, who - are you going to be hanging out with Oprah Winfrey and other stars?
Guest: Not me. No. I'm going to try to go over to the one with Sting and will.i.am that's being held at the Newseum right on Pennsylvania.
Host: Oh, that sounds like fun.
Guest: Yeah, that would be fun.
Host: All right, have a great time.
Guest: Well, thanks, Madeleine.
Host: NPR news analyst Juan Williams. I'll be here, but at least it's warm. Day to Day continues.