Host: From the studios of NPR West, this is Day to Day. I'm Alex Cohen. Just ahead on the program, that very scary D-word - depression. Are we there yet? That's coming up. First though, it's a mixed bag for homeowners this week. President Obama has promised to help refinance mortgages for up to nine million people, but House Democrats are looking to limit the amount of help homeowners can get from bankruptcy judges. Here to help us sort through this is Renae Merle. She is a reporter and she joins us from the newsroom of the Washington Post. Renae, let's start off with this legislation. Originally, it would have allowed bankruptcy judges to cut the principal balance on mortgages, lower interest rates, extend loan terms. All of which are things that could save homeowners money, but then House Democrats objected. What was their concern?
Guest: Well, they wanted to limit the number or - which homeowners could benefit from this program. Basically, they felt that people who didn't really have any problems with their mortgage would just suddenly file for bankruptcy in order to get a new better mortgage. They were concerned this would just cause a lot of people to file for bankruptcy in order to take advantage of the option of having the principal reduced on their mortgage.
Host: And they got a lot of pressure from the companies that make these loans, correct?
Guest: Definitely, the financial sources industry, the lenders have been fighting this proposal for years really.
Host: So, now, the House has come up with a narrower version of this legislation. What would this new incarnation allow?
Guest: Well, this one still allows homeowners who are in trouble to file for bankruptcy and possibly get a modification. But it also says that if the homeowner has been offered an affordable loan modification, that for example, lowers their payments to 31 percent of their income, they wouldn't qualify. It also says that before cutting the principle owned by the homeowner, that judge would consider lowering the interest rate. It's just adds a few restrictions that the financial sources industry has been asking for.
Host: Let's turn now to the Obama administration's plan, who does it help and how much help does it offer?
Guest: Well, there are two tranches into this program. There's a refinancing program up to five million homeowners the Obama administration thinks can be helped with this one. And there's a refinancing program, so people who have little equity in their home would be able to refinance if their loan is owned or guaranteed by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac, those mortgage financing giants that the government took over last year. They will be able to refinance, which they can't do now if they don't have at least 20 percent equity in their home which many people don't because of falling home values. That's the first part of the program. Then there's a loan modification part of the program that's for people who are having trouble paying their mortgage. Their mortgage is just unaffordable. And this would - the administration basically is going to give incentives to the servicers to encourage them to modify these loans and help get them - a homeowner's payment down to 31 percent of their income.
Host: Renae, refinancing takes time and it seems like everyday, as the economy grows worse, home values decline. So, how will all of that play into these loan modifications?
Guest: Well, for the loan modifications, the administration believes by getting the payments down to 31 percent of the person's income, that is the most important thing, that, you know, the refinancing and loan modification programs are separate. In the loan modification part of the program, they're not going to try to deal with the fact that your home values have fallen. They're just going to try to get you into a more affordable mortgage.
Host: And we should note today, new data came out from First American CoreLogic showing one out of every five Americans owe more on their homes than their homes are worth. Do you think this plan will be enough to deal with this situation that's become so pervasive?
Guest: It's unclear to me now. I mean, in order to deal with the underwater problem, people who owe more than their home is worth, you really have to deal with the foreclosure problem. And so if the administration is able to get the servicers or lenders out there and modifying these loans and stopping people from going into foreclosure, that could help stop the free fall in prices.
Host: Renae Merle of the Washington Post, thank you.
Guest: Thank you.