Host: This is News and Notes. I'm Farai Chideya. For decades, the Big Three auto companies have been an integral part of the U.S. economy. Now those companies are struggling to survive and pleading for a federal bailout. General Motors, Ford and Chrysler have until Tuesday to submit a restructuring plan to Congress. For more, we've got Jerome Vaughn. He's the news program director for WDET in Detroit, Michigan. Jerome, great to have you back on the show.
Guest: Thanks. Glad to be with you.
Host: So what we've been hearing a lot about is basically just a failure of these negotiations to move forward. Before we get to the nuts and bolts of it, from an economic level, how are people in Detroit dealing with what appears to be a reluctance on the part of the federal government to really enter into a bailout?
Guest: Well, I think there are really two key emotions that are at play in Detroit right now. One is fear. People are very scared because the auto industry is so important to metro Detroit, thousands and thousands and thousands of jobs. If one or more of the automakers were to go under, the ripple effect here would be catastrophic because the plant is affected and then the suppliers are affected and the restaurants are affected and the shopping malls are affected. So there'd be such a horrible cascading effect. So fear is number one, and I think number two is anger. People see how roughly the automakers were treated, and people feel that they were being treated as autoworkers, roughly as well, when at the same time you see, you know, on a Sunday night Citibank gets $20 billion without a second thought. So people here are very angry about the different treatments Wall Street and the automakers have received.
Host: Let's go into some of the ongoing plans. The General Motors board put their heads together yesterday and worked on a restructuring plan. Do we know anything about what they were talking about?
Guest: We don't have a lot of details because the automakers aren't really interested in giving too much away early. But there are a few things that we can really surmise that are in there because Congress was really adamant about a few things. One was fuel economy standards. Congress is really hammering. They wanted better fuel economy standards. They wanted the automakers to pull back on their opposition to those fuel economy standards getting better. And there was a whole political bit of intrigue last week and the week before as well. John Dingell was taken off of a key committee. He's always been a supporter of the auto industry, and in his place will be Congressman Waxman from California, who is very much a supporter of higher auto industry standards for CAFE. So that's part one. Compensation for the executives is expected to be cut in some form or another. That was something Congress was very adamant about, saying, how can, you know, the profits be dropping so horribly when at the same time the executives are making millions and millions and millions of dollars? And then also, when the executives testified, they really showed a reluctance to work for a dollar a year, with the exception of Bob Nardelli. So those are a couple of things we know are going to be in there, as well as plans for continuing to pare back and make the auto industry more competitive on a global basis. So those are things we're expecting to see tomorrow.
Host: All right. What about the UAW, the union? Ron Gettelfinger says the union is going to be willing to renegotiate somewhat to help this whole push for federal loans. What kind of concessions could you see from the autoworkers' union?
Guest: Well, I think Ron Gettelfinger is in a very hard place these days because he wants to represent his members, but at the same he realized the automakers are in such a precarious position he's going to lose a lot of members and a lot of members' jobs if this isn't handled well. So, I would expect some pulling back on wages, also the elimination of the jobs bank that was something that really pushed the buttons of Congress. They were really upset that here are these workers, they're getting paid 90 percent of their salary even though they're not doing any work. Those numbers have come down dramatically over the past few years. There's only several hundred people in the jobs bank now as opposed to thousands in the years before. But that was something that still really upset Congress. I think the other thing that we're going to look at is how health-care costs for retirees are going to be paid and managed. There is this new deal that came out where GM and Ford and Chrysler are going to pay into a trust fund. Some of those details might be reconfigured a bit to make it a little more palatable to the automakers.
Host: All right. The Center for Automotive Research, a Michigan-based think tank, estimates that if the automakers shut down half of their manufacturing capacity, two and a half million people could lose their jobs. So put that in context for me. Compared to losses so far over time, in the Detroit area in particular, is this far vaster than anything we've ever seen?
Guest: Yes. I mean, I think the only thing that would be comparable would be really going back to the Great Depression when, you know, many auto companies went out of business. There were at times, you know, dozens and dozens and dozens of automakers here in Detroit back in the '20s and '30s, and many of them closed during the Depression, unemployment skyrocketed, and I think we're looking at that sort of eventuality now if one of the automakers goes under. It's going to be ugly not just for metro Detroit, but for the rest of the country because, you know, there is going to be a huge ripple effect for the rest of the country.
Host: There are some unusual requests or proposals on the table. I was reading the blog of Seth Godin the other day. He's kind of a marketing guru who comes out with a lot of books and has a new one coming up and gives a lot of speeches at influential technology conferences. And his argument was, instead of just helping the automakers that exist, create an environment where people might be willing to create new auto companies, upstarts that would then have technological innovation. I haven't really heard a lot of other people push for that. Is there any question of whether or not rivals could emerge during this tough time for the Big Three?
Guest: Rivals might be too strong a word. But I think there's definitely the possibility of some entrepreneurship that could happen. There could be smaller automakers that come up and start making cars. I think the problem overall economically is nobody coming up is going to replace GM or Ford or Chrysler. I mean, the volume there is immense. You know, the efficiencies of scale, while not perfect, are much better than a startup is going to be. You know, they're responsible, you know, for, you know, 50 percent of the cars sold in the U.S. right now. Is a startup or two going to make a dent in that? No, not for some time. And we've seen startups from other countries come in, sell, you know, thousands of cars, but not millions. So that's probably not a viable response that's going to save the situation economically.
Host: So right now we're looking at the car companies going back to Congress tomorrow with restructuring plans. What do we know about their approach? Last time they were criticized for flying in on corporate jets. In terms of style and in terms of substance, what we can we expect?
Guest: Well, I think that's something that really shocked the automakers that they were taken to task for coming in in private jets. So however they get there is going to be much lower key. We know that some of the automakers may be driving. Some may be flying commercial. But part of what's happened was immediately after that the thought was, well, let's have a huge caravan. We'll have, you know, hundreds and hundreds of cars coming from all across the Midwest going to Washington, D.C. That was the immediate response. Then that was dialed back a little bit, and they kind of realized, well, they'd probably take a hit on that too, you know, wasting a lot of gas and creating a lot of pollution. So they didn't want to go with that response, either. So what they're going to do, they're going to have a news conference tomorrow where they're going to talk about the economic impact on every state in the Union represented by people from each state of the Union, where they'll talk about the auto industry impact, the number of jobs that might be lost if, you know, one of the automakers went under. So that's really going to be their approach on a PR level. And I think, you know, they're really getting their ducks in a row for tomorrow because they saw how harsh the questioning was the first time around. They're going to be better prepared for it tomorrow.
Host: All right, Jerome. Thanks.
Guest: My pleasure.
Host: Jerome Vaughn is news program director for WDET in Detroit, Michigan. He spoke to us from their studios.