Host: This is News & Notes, I'm Farai Chideya. How do we decide who to vote for in an election? Is it about how much you think a candidate is going to raise your taxes, or because you have a gut feeling about their character? We continue our month-long series on voting with a look at voter psychology and campaign messaging. In a few minutes we're going to talk to a pollster and a policy analyst. But joining us now to talk about the psychology of voting we've got Robert Luskin. He's an associate professor of communication at Stanford University and a research advisor for their Center for Deliberative Democracy. Hi, how are you doing?
Guest: Hi. How are you?
Host: Good. All right. So list a few different factors that make a difference in how people vote?
Guest: Well of course. There are policy issues, how you see the candidates in relation to your own policy preferences, there's retrospective judgments about how well or poorly things are going in the country, there's the reactions to the candidates as people and there's party affiliation.
Host: Do we have any sense of what's the most important?
Guest: Well these things are difficult to sort out, but I think it's fair to say reading over the studies of the matter that at least in recent decades, the candidates' personalities have probably been the single most important factor.
Host: One of the things we've taken a look at on our show is how personalities, or perceived personalities, play out in the age of television and blogs and this relentless onslaught of updates about what people look like. Whether they're making a funny face. Whether they made a gaffe. Has the perception of candidates, or how you judge even those feelings that you have for a candidate changed because of how the media has changed?
Guest: What sort of change in the media do you have in mind?
Host: The rapidity with which we see candidates' images change. You know, one day you'll see one speech live. You might see another speech by the same candidate live the same day. You'll see a blog post with images sometimes that look mocking of a candidate. That is not the case with what elections used to be like, where candidates were given a little more leeway to seem a little more presidential even before they were elected.
Guest: I'm not sure if that's had much effect. What has had a long-term effect is the penetration of society by television and information about what the candidates are like, or at least what they appear to be like. Their persona on television is now readily available, whereas decades ago it wasn't. And that's had an influence in raising the level of impact for candidate personalities.
Host: Are people comfortable really talking to researchers about what they think? Are people honest?
Guest: Oh, I think they are generally honest. They're not necessarily that insightful. I mean there's quite a bit of literature and psychology to suggest that people are actually not very good at describing it, at knowing themselves what processes have led them to different choices.
Host: OK. When you take a look at this election, is there anything that stands out, that's different from, say, four years ago, eight years ago, 12 years ago In terms of how people are making a selection of their candidate? Or are the trends pretty much the same?
Guest: Well I think the broad factors are the same. That is that there are a number of more minor influences, but the big influences on vote choice can be put under the headings I listed earlier. And I don't know that they're carrying greatly different weights either. But what has changed is how those factors are militating in this election. So in this election, of course, people see the times as very bad. A lot of people are unhappy with American foreign policy, the war in Iraq in particular. More so, a lot of people are worried about the economy and see the Bush administration as responsible for the current economic crises. So on those counts and a few others, there's very widespread dissatisfaction with the Bush administration. So what I described earlier as retrospective judgments are running very heavily anti-Bush, which means, since he is the Republican candidate, also anti-McCain.
Host: Well, professor, thank you.
Guest: You're welcome. My pleasure.
Host: That was Robert Luskin, associate professor of communication and research advisor at the Center for Deliberative Democracy at Stanford University. He joined us from the studios at Stanford University.