Host: And now it's letter time, our editor Sasa Woodruff is here with me. Hey, Sasa.
Guest: Hey, Tony how's it going?
Host: It's going great actually. So it sounds like the economic downturn and California prison reform caught the attention of listeners this week.
Guest: That's right. Linda Kinlow(ph) who listens to us from Madison, Alabama sent us these thought after she heard Monday's segment about a court order to reduce California's prison population. She wrote, we had a system that was working, but educating people in prison was rebuked by politicians who saw the rational of educating and rehabilitation of human beings who commit a crime as voting capital. Lock them up and throw away the key was popular. Prison systems are a business and look at who's running them.
Host: Then listener Ridge Edwards of Randallstown, Maryland mused after a segment on the economic downturn. He wrote, I remember something Malcolm X suggested as a way to strengthen yourself, your family, and your neighborhood. I'd love to see if contributor Dr. Julianne Malveaux feels it is relevant today. Basically, he stated that one should buy and do business with the people that are closest to you - that is family, then neighbors, then neighborhood, et cetera. It seems that even the buy from your local farms movement has a similar philosophy.
Guest: Then Camille Cox commented on our Web site after hearing the segment on the black and white comedy duo, Tim Reid and Tom Dreesen. She noted, I think it's unfortunate that this book is not getting enough press coverage. In the age of Obama, it seems that the press is still brainwashed to think that we can't get passed racial issues.
Host: Daniel Federa in Evans, Georgia wrote in after he heard a listener lament the state of black media tied to the cancellation of News & Notes. He wrote, I didn't realize that News & Notes was "black media" - that's in quotes. News & Notes is one of my favorite programs - topical, well-read, and well-produced. Maybe at some level I recognized some of the reporters and commentators were black, but for me that was just part of the perspective you brought to the stories. You do good work. After the last show airs, I'll miss a good new show. Period.
Guest: And that's it for letters. Please keep your comments coming over the next few weeks.
Host: And to write us, just log on to npr.org and click on Contact Us. When you get there, you'll see lots of shows to choose from. Make sure you choose News & Notes when you write to us.
Guest: And be sure to tell us where you're writing from and how to pronounce your name.
Host: Sasha, thank you very much.
Guest: No problem, Tony.
Host: That's our show for today. Glad you could join us. To listen or subscribe, visit our Web site, nprnewsandnotes.org or the blog at nprnewsandviews.org. Tomorrow - renewable energy, reduced emissions, resource conservation. Candidate Obama made sweeping green promises, how will he keep those? We'll look at his environment and energy agenda. I'm Tony Cox. This is News & Notes.