Yeah, there's all sorts of different studies that are going on in this building. Okay. Yep. I've seen them on Craigslist, so that's why. Oh, yeah. There's a couple of groups that do the studies through Craigslist. All right, perfect. So this is just showing that you're being listened to. Can I turn it off? Uh-huh. This is also being recorded, so we can get started. All right. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. Think of me as a friend. I don't judge. I can't. I'm a computer. Okay. I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions today at the start. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. How are you doing today? I'm doing good. Thank you. That's good. Where are you from originally? I'm from Los Angeles. Really? Me too. Oh, great. Where do you live? I live in West Los Angeles, the west side. Nice. How do you like your living situation? It's all right. Do you have roommates? No, I live alone, so. That's great. How do you like LA? I love it. I'm from here, so I grew up here. It's natural. Wow. What are some things you really like about LA? The weather. Well, the weather. It's always good. It's never bad. There's always something to do. It's a rarely dull moment. What are some things you don't really like about LA? The traffic. The traffic is horrible. Well, probably traffic is horrible in almost any major city, but I hate the traffic. Do you travel a lot? Not really. I mean, I have enough things going on here, so if I travel, it's usually somewhere that's within driving distance. Okay. What did you study at school? I'm a math major. I studied business. I didn't. Are you still doing that? No. I've been done for a few years, so I haven't gone to school for a while. One of these days, I'll go back to graduate school, but. Awesome. What's your dream job? My dream job would be to just work for myself and make lots of money. I don't know. I don't really have a dream job. It's just something that I do. It's something that I can work under my own terms and get paid decently and be in a creative environment. How hard is that? I don't know. I think it's just a matter of finding the right situation. Right now, people are a little conservative about what they want and how they want it, so it's a little tougher than it seems. Okay. I think it's just a matter of finding the right situation. I think when the situation is right, I don't think it's too difficult. It can be tough to find a good job these days. Yep. What do you do now? I work as an administrative assistant through a temp agency. I just basically get sent out to do desk jobs. Are you happy to do that? Yes and no. I mean, I feel like I'm a little bit older. I feel like I could do more, but it works. You know? Okay. How close are you to your family? I'm pretty close. I mean, they're around, so. What are some things that make you really mad? God, really mad? Stupid. stupid people just basically doing anything to annoy me. That's the big thing, just irritating, stupid people who just do things just to provoke me for no reason at all. Can you give me an example of that? What's a good example? Just random people who think it's funny to just, if they're gonna get a rise out of me, it doesn't have to be any specific situation. It's just people who just think it's funny. I think they're just generally sadistic and they just think it's funny to just prod you. It's like poking a stick at an angry dog, knowing that they just wanna push your buttons for no reason. When was the last time that happened? God, I don't remember. With those situations, I usually try not to remember when it happens. I just let it go and it's like the past is the past. I just tend not to look back. What do you mean? Let's come back to that later. Okay. What do you do to relax? God, what do I do to relax? I like to run. I like to go to the gym, listen to music. I have a lot of musician friends, so I'm usually around musicians. So anything of that sort. I like everything from punk rock art to tattoos to just anything that's generally art and creative. Awesome. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? Yeah. Who's been a positive? I think it's just friends in general who seem to do well. And I think they're very inspiring, and which is sometimes a bit tough in a town like Los Angeles where I think everybody's on the go trying to accomplish their own goals. So they don't, it's sometimes hard to find someone who's gonna be uplifting or trying to be inspiring. I don't really have anybody in particular, but people have kind of brought up things here and there. Like what? You know, it's like, hey, instead of doing this, how about doing that? Or, hey, you're good at this, why aren't you doing that? Or something like that. Just, I'm always looking for new opportunities, so they always point out things that maybe I could do differently instead of just being negative saying, hey, don't do that. That's no, that's, why are you doing that? That's a waste of time. That's good. How are you at controlling your time frame? Um, I guess it depends on who you talk to. I'm okay at it. I could probably work at that. I don't know. I mean, I can, I think I could do better at it. Can you give me an example of that? Well, back to the point about people provoking me. So, I mean, I try not to blow steam and let them get under my skin. So I just usually try not to let it get to me. But I don't know. I guess with temper, I guess it depends on how I handle my stress. Lately, I've been better at it just because I think my situation's been a little bit better. That's good. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you ever served in the military? No. Okay. Is there anything you regret? Nothing major. I mean, maybe when I was younger, I could have traveled more or I could have worked towards, you know, something that I could have done. Something that paid better job-wise. But I mean, those are all things that I think at any point in life, you always think like, well, I could have, should have, would have done. But, you know, but then again, I think that's natural for anybody. I mean, I could have become a banker or I could have become a lawyer or a doctor and made about 10 times the money that I make now. But then again, I don't like law and I don't like medicine. So it wasn't meant to be. So. Right. There are always trade-offs in life, aren't there? Yeah. What made you decide to do that? I think, I think my, in my life, I knew that there's a lot of things I, there's more dislikes than likes. So I kind of narrowed it down to what am I good at and what am I not good at and what am I gonna work well or who am I gonna work well with and who, who will I not work well with. So I kind of, I kind of sorted it out and then the list kind of, kind of answered itself, so. That sounds really hard. No, I don't think it was hard, but it was just, but I think it was a real reality check. And I think it, it's kind of a good thing because sometimes trying to conform to doing things that doesn't really fit you doesn't make sense. It's like trying to shove a round peg into a square, a square hole. And it's like, it's just, no matter how you try to shove it in, it's not gonna go in. So sometimes it's just, you might as well go down a path that seems to work better for you. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Memorable experiences. Hmm. I think it's just, I don't really have like any one in particular. I think, I think every day is almost like a memorable experience, whether it's positive or negative. I think it's just everything from getting it, just, just the fact that I got a job and I can, I can take care of myself is already almost like a memorable experience. Maybe for the average person, it sounds stupid, but you know, I think just the fact that, you know, I'm not, you know, I'm able, I'm able to get this far in life without like completely self-destructing is already an accomplishment. So I feel like I've gotten somewhere. Maybe not to not, maybe not to the point to the average person, they might think like, well, why aren't you a millionaire? But you know what? Not everybody can be a millionaire. Yeah. Yeah. When was the last time you felt really happy? Um, when was the last time I really felt happy? Um, I don't know. I'm not really someone who's like, I don't have any real high highs or low lows. I mean, I haven't hit any lows. So I mean, I don't know. I'm usually pretty, I feel like I'm a level person and I'm pretty, every day I feel like if I accomplish one thing that I'm pretty happy. So I guess to answer the question, probably, probably yesterday. I just feel like if I'm able to accomplish something, then, then, hey, I'm happy. That's great. How would your best friend describe you? I don't know. I don't really have a best friend, but I mean, well, to answer the question, generally friends. I think they would say that I'm pretty outgoing. I'm pretty determined. I'm trying, you know, I try to, you know, I try to interact as much as possible. I'm always out networking as much as possible. So I don't know. I guess that's basically what I think they would describe me as. Okay. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Okay. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. No problem. Goodbye. All right. Bye. Are we all done? Yeah. Okay, great. I'm gonna shut all this down and then we just have a quick quick service for you, okay? Okay, that was weird. Should I unplug this or? Yeah, I'll.