There you are. Wow. You won't see yourself this whole time. Okay. So I'm just going to move around so I can activate the connect, which is what's recording your body. Okay. So there we go. Perfect. And now we can get started. When you're finished, when she's done, we can hit this up and I know that it's connected. Okay. Thank you. Hi, I'm Eleanor. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. Like an amazing friend. I don't judge. I can. I'm a computer. I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. How are you doing today? Okay. How about yourself? I'm great. Thanks. Where are you from originally? Here in California. Really? Yeah. What are some things you really like about LA? Oh, well, that it's big and broad. It's a lot to do. A lot of job opportunities than other states. Pretty much that it's big and it's a lot you can do here. Yeah. What are some things you don't really like about LA? Traffic. Maybe the violence, right? The bad news. Even though you want to know what's going on in your environment, but you still have to watch it so you can look out to see what's going on on a daily basis. What did you study at school? Sociology. I have a two-year degree in liberal arts, but my major was sociology. Nice. Are you still working in that? No. I'm actually an MTA bus operator. What's your dream job? Well. Since Metro is study growing, my dream job is to move up in the company. I'm about to actually start some classes for supervisory next week. Because they look to promote within the company. So that's a good thing. It's a lot of opportunities at Metro where you can take classes and they'll pay for your tuition and things of that nature. That sounds like a great situation. Thanks. How hard is that? It's hard. Well, it's not actually hard. Right now it's easy if you take advantage of it right now. Because they look to promote within. So, you know, since I'm already working there, that's a good thing. So it's good to go ahead and take the classes that you need, that you're interested in, and go ahead and move up the ladder as soon as possible. What do you mean? I'm sorry. Okay. What do you do to relax? Read, take a long walk, hot bath, meditate, just close my eyes sometimes. Okay. How are you at controlling your temper? I'm pretty much good because, see, by me being a bus operator, you run into circumstances and situations, you've got to remain calm and still remain professional at the same time. Right. How hard is that? Well, I look at it like it goes with, I mean, it comes with experience. You know, you do something on a continuous basis. Usually you, somewhere down the line, you become good at it. You know, so I look at it like that. So I've been driving for years and dealing with the public. So it's just how you handle circumstances. You know, you treat people like you want to be treated. Okay. Do you have any problems? No. I'm pretty good at it now. Maybe when I was younger, you know. As you get older, you get wiser and you learn different things. And I'm still learning today. Yeah. Who's the most positive influence in your life? I would say my family. You know, my kids, you know. Even though, you know, I've been having a lot of deaths around me, but that's part of the life. Okay. You know, you born here, but you got to leave here one day. But my kids will keep me, you know, sane and, you know, I love them and my family. That sounds like a great situation. Thank you. Do you find it easy to be a parent? No. How hard is it being a parent? Setting good examples, you know, because you're the first teacher, you know. And you want to set a positive, good example for your kids. And I think that's a good thing. And it starts at home. Can you give me an example of that? Well, by you being the first teacher, your kids, you're the one that they see on a daily basis when they wake up. So whatever's being taught in the home, they look in and learn every day. You know, whether it's at home. You know, kids have a tendency to do things what they see. You know what I mean? So you try to keep it positive. Teach them good morals and values and how to get along with other people regardless of race and, you know, different things of that nature. Tell me about your kids. I have a four-and-a-half-year-old son. I have a seven-year-old daughter. And I also have a 23-year-old. Yeah, I'm about to be, well, my daughter. My daughter's pregnant with the boy. She has three little girls. So I have three grandkids and one on the way, which is the boy this time. Awesome. Yeah, thank you. What's the hardest thing about being a parent? The hardest thing is, well, right now, I'm a single parent. So that makes it hard alone itself, you know. And they can be expensive at times. You know, it depends on the person's situation, you know, whether they have help or a job. You know, things of that nature to help the situation better. But it's hard, you know. But I try to, you know, keep a job, you know, keep food in the house. You know, just maintain and support my kids the best way I can. Yeah. Thank you. What's one of your most memorable experiences? With my kids or just period? Whatever comes to your mind. What's memorable for me is that I'm the only one in my family with a degree. So it's kind of like, yeah, it's kind of even though I'm the baby of ten kids, you know, and I always kept that in the back of my mind, even though everybody, well, pretty much my whole family have decent jobs, but I'm the one with the degree. So I kind of like gave myself a pat on the back, like, you know, you know, I just, that's the only thing I remember in graduating, you know, and my family there to support me. That's so good to hear. Thank you. How do you feel in that moment? Happy that I accomplished something. You know, just even though it may not be much, but it was better than just having a high school diploma. And I had, I was working on my bachelor's degree, but I, I ended up in a bad car accident. I never went back. I got distracted and, you know, I was working at the same time, but I was just like more so I needed income than, than schooling at that time because I was a young parent, you know, because I had my daughter at 17. So I was like, I needed the money to support her, but I never went back. But I feel like it's never too late. So I felt like I take some classes now that I'm with Metro to help me move up the ladder. So that's why I'm starting my class. Next. Next week. Thank you. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Hmm. Well, the advice I would have gave myself that I probably wouldn't have been a young mother at a young age in that I probably would have stayed in school, you know, not let the accident just, just distract me and not, I would have remained in school. I probably wouldn't have kids early, you know, rather I probably would have stayed in school and probably have a part time job or something. Just I just feel like education is an excellent thing for a person just having knowledge and learning different things. Keep your mind open to learning new ideas every day. So I think that's a plus, you know, in anybody's shoes, just to better themselves. You know, the images that I see help that I got from my little progressions and what I might have done of helping my children to do something different than what I did. You know, through education, maybe to maybe promote within your company or whatever the case may be, to to help better your career. I'm quite sure you learn from your mistakes, you know. But at the same time, you don't continue to make the same ones. I feel like it's okay to make a mistake. But long should do something to change. You know, like myself, even though I'm going to be back at higher education, you know, I'm going to keep getting old. going to school late, but still I'm going. You know, I want to better myself career-wise. So. There are always trade-offs in life, aren't there? Yes. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? My oldest daughter. We had an argument because just the life she's living right now and the things that she's going through. And I had told her that she just needs to make some changes to better her situation. And we got into an argument because you know how your kids sometimes don't want to hear it, you know, hear the stuff that you're saying even though it's true or they just, you know, quote, they just don't want to hear it. You know, they may be going through something. Mm-hmm. And they don't want to hear it, but we got an argument about it, but that just happened, you know. I just told her my. How close are you to them? I'm sorry? How close are you to them? Very close. Very close. It's just that the situation my daughter's in right now, she just needs to make some changes to better her life. And I've been telling. How close are you to them? She's, she kind of like stubborn in her own way. You know, I was raised to listen to your mom. You know, your mom was not going to tell you nothing wrong. And I've been telling her over the years, you know, different things. And it's kind of like I was talking to a wall because she did the opposite. And now she's, she regretting it, you know, because she's like, my mom told me this, you know, why am I doing the opposite? So I guess she got to bump her head a couple of times to get it. It's kind of like I didn't told you, I done left it alone. And now it's up to you. And, and how hard is that? It's very frustrating because it's like I'm talking to a wall and she's not hearing me. And I'm like, it seemed like it's taking forever for her to change, but it's left up to the individual when they're ready. You know what I mean? Once a person get tired of something, they make a change. It may not be when you want it to happen, but the ball is in her court, you know? I only can do so much. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Oh, wow. I have my days. Since I have two little ones, I kind of like train them to go to bed at 8 o'clock because, you know, they got to go to school. And I think it's important to have a good night's rest because it kind of like gets you ready for the next day or, you know, how you're going to feel if you're rested, what type of person you're going to be that day, you know, because everybody has their days, you know, whether they're good or bad, but this is part of life. And I feel like if you had a good night's rest, hopefully you'll have a good day, you know. Do you feel that way often? Pretty much. You know, I need my rest because I'm out there driving that bus and dealing with all these people and, you know, the day is coming. So the job itself is very stressful. So I feel like if I'm rested, it'll help me. What are you like when you don't sleep well? What am I like? Irritated, tired, lazy, you know. I feel like I want to lay down, probably go to sleep, get the rest that I need. What do you do when you're annoyed? I never thought about that. I just, you know, because like I said, you know, everybody had their moments, they do. I never thought about that. Hmm. Hmm. Okay. Have you ever served in the military? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. Okay. How would your best friend describe you? I don't really have a best friend, but a person that I deal with, that I used to work with, she'll probably tell you that I'm very outgoing, a go-getter, dependable, responsible. I'm a people person. I get along with others. You know, I'm kind of like... Um... I live in the military. Um, I have a good... I have a good mark. Whether I know you or not. If you was to, you know, like, like you and I now... You know, I um, you'd probably say, oh, she seems like a nice young lady, or whatever, you know, something like that. Right. That's great. Thank you. When was the last time you felt really happy? Well, I try to stay happy. I'd rather be happy than sad. Um... My kids keep me going, you know what I mean? Especially when I go to pick them up from school or maybe, hey, Mom, you know, that just kind of like make my day. Just them run up to me, you know, and be happy and excited, you know what I mean? Yeah. That's so good to hear. Thank you. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. You're more than welcome. You have a good day. Goodbye. Goodbye. You're welcome. I'm going to turn all this off and then we can just have a good concert later. Okay. That is so interesting.