Okay, looks like we're good. But let's move around a little bit. Make sure that the connect is picking you up. Okay. All right, it's taking its time. Okay, great. And then if you don't mind, can I ask you to just place yourself on the floor? Oh sure. Yeah. Perfect. We just can't have anything in your hands. Okay, great. Okay, and when this is all done, she'll let you know. And then if you want to hit this doorbell again to let me know. Thank you. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. Think of me as a friend. I don't judge. I can't. I'm a computer. I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. How are you doing today? Okay. Hi. That's good. Where are you from originally? Colorado. Really? Mm-hmm. Why'd you move to LA? Career. Career possibilities. Hmm. What do you do now? Paralegal. Awesome. When did you move to LA? For further education, for the weather, for a friend. Mm-hmm. How often do you go back to your hometown? Not often at all now. Every few years. Oh. What are some things you really like about LA? The weather, the beach, sunsets at the beach. There's a lot of career possibilities. An educated group of people, sophisticated market. Mm-hmm. How easy was it for you to get used to living in LA? It is an adjustment to come here. A lot of people misjudge it a little bit. It's a laid-back appearing town, but it's actually very sensitive to, you know, success and commercialization and that kind of thing. So you have to keep up the pace. Yeah. How hard is that? That is a little bit harder, I think, when you first make the adjustment. And pretty soon it becomes obvious that it's another market. Yeah. And that you just have to work hard and like you do in others. Mm-hmm. That makes sense. What's your dream job? Oh, an attorney. Really? Why? Oh, just because you have the power. You can use, you know, skills to be able to affect people's lives in a more dramatic way than just being an assistant in that field. Cool. How close are you to your family? Oh, a lot of it is not around anymore. Just have brothers and sisters out of state, so not particularly close right now. I'm sorry. What are some things that make you really mad? Dishonesty, unkindness, lack of sympathy, insensitivity, you know. Yeah. How do you deal with that? How are you at controlling your temper? Very good. If anything, I'm regressive that way. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? Oh, wow. Oh, just a friend. A friend who is right now has a fabulous job but is spending too much money, that he needs to say. Uh-oh. How do you know them? Through a work situation, just a work connection. How close are you to them? Close, close now. We spend time, we go out and have fun sometimes. That's good. What are some things you like to do for fun? A walk, a walk on the beach, you know, shop in the beach areas. It's kind of a rodeo drive occasionally. And see films, art galleries. Okay. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? Oh, my daughter. Ah. Tell me about your kids. I just have one daughter who graduated UCLA Law School, and I raised her totally alone without any help, so it seemed like an accomplishment that was worth it. Wow. Two jobs and the work. What's the biggest thing about being a parent? Just, I'd say peer pressure. It can totally alter anything a parent has tried to put into a child. It's good. Yeah. Can you give me an example of that? Oh, wow. Yeah, my daughter, for being now a graduate of law school, when she was, we kept her in Beverly Hills schools, and some of those very wealthy kids with very named celebrity families used to like Shoplift. She actually got in trouble for that once, and that because she was an influence. So that was a really bad time for us. That sounds really hard. What do you think of fitting a kid? I think it depends on which neighborhood or state you're in, or the, I think they're a little misguided, I think a little uninspired right now. I think they're then weighed down by the concerns of the wars and things like that, and I think they could probably use a common goal, a common, you know, an analogy, as opposed to just being more separated group than once they were, I think. You know, kind of uninspired. Yeah. I think that's what I would say right now. Yeah. I see what you mean. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? I worry sometimes about, you know, work issues, but it's pretty easy. Do you feel that way often? No. I don't feel like I'm not sleeping. I just occasionally worry about something horrible. When was the last time that happened? Oh, gosh, about a couple weeks ago. How did you feel in that moment? Oh, just, you know, unfortunate we have to worry, you know, unfortunate this isn't easier, it's just cooperation between people. It solves most everything, you know, so you always want to have that around you. Mm-hmm. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Just stressed. Yeah, stressed. More stressed. That sounds really hard. Do you feel down? Yeah, fatigue has a lot of, you know, implications for just not feeling like yourself or misjudging things that you might judge differently if you were more rested. Yeah. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Not depression. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? Probably. I was, that was considered the possibility. I had an employment lawsuit several years ago. And actually litigated it and won a settlement. It's something called whistleblower thing, implications of that. And I was kind of harassed about it. And so I found when I got out of it, I couldn't find work right away in my field. So I had to go into a different field, go back to UCLA and get a new professional direction. And I found myself fearful sometimes that it's going to happen again. You know, anything might never happen again. I'm sorry to hear that. What got you to seek help? Just that I was noticing that. I was noticing that I was feeling very, in my paralegal class I had a section about employment law. And there was a very complicated filing I had done with great adult work and study for my case. But once faced with it again in that class setting, I just couldn't get it done. It was late. It was a late paper for me. And I realized I was traumatized by having to go through that again. You know, post-traumatic stress sometimes comes later after the adrenaline dies down. When I understand it now. So I think it was just hitting me later, you know, that I was having to face that paper again. And wow, you know, no adrenaline, just like wow, there it is again. What were your symptoms? Just extreme, you know, avoidance of getting something done that should have been easy for me. And thinking about it as thoroughly as I should, or studying it or putting it off. Putting the feeling of going through that paper, that type of paper, even if it's just a class assignment again. Yeah. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? Well, not lately. You know, back then for sure when that happened, which was about ten years ago now, it was still in the court about seven years ago now. And yeah, it was effective. You know, it was effective in the way you do most everything and your confidence and that kind of thing. Do you feel like therapy's useful? I'm sorry? Repeat the question. Do you feel like therapy's useful? Peaceful. Do I feel peaceful? Well, yeah, I was peaceful that it was settled, but angry that it ever happened. So it's hard to all probably not ever feel peaceful about that issue ever. It always, the mention of it always makes me angry that I had to go through that. Yeah. Yeah. Have you done anything to avoid it? I don't think so. I tried everything to avoid it, you know. And so I think that was aggravating for me too because I'm a patient person, I'm realistic. And I tried everything to avoid a confrontation in the matter, but it was just required to try to, you know, help me cover the damage to our lives and my daughter's life. Yeah. Do you consider yourself an introvert? I, not now. Maybe one time in my life, not now. If you can't communicate, you know, you can communicate, you can overcome people's perceptions and their judgments of you. If you can effectively explain something. And it will help you overcome other perceptions of yourself that others might normally have, judgments for age or anything like that. Yeah. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Well, just raising a daughter, extendedly, you know, or, you know, just the experience of figuring that was a, after all the years, that was a success, her graduating from law school. Yeah. Yeah. How did you feel in that moment? Just like a lot of work had a good ending. You know, happy, glad that it was fulfilled, wishes or dreams for this child were fulfilled. You know, and she was able to make that success. That's great. When was the last time you felt really happy? Wow. Yeah. I'm tempted to be kind of happy with life because the alternative is going to harm your, you know, your ability to succeed. So I try to force happiness, I guess, in most every situation in my life. I find something about it. When I lost some weight recently, that made me really happy. Wow. That's great. Do you travel a lot? I travel a little bit locally. I traveled more when I was younger. I really enjoy that. But I've just been too busy in the last few years. Yeah. What do you enjoy about traveling? Just new places, ability to take the worries we have every day, work or concerns and kind of put them away for a while and see something new. I'd love to hear about one of your trips. We went back to Colorado several years ago, went through Vail and spent the night there. And it was just during spring where there aren't any skiers and it was just beautiful and very quiet. A lot of restaurants with the decks and open in the mountains. It was beautiful. That sounds like a great situation. How would your best friend describe you? Wow. Just ardent, hardworking, loyal, creative. Okay. What's the best thing about being a parent? Just seeing something that you're creating. You're trying to create, become something that you hoped the picture would be. You know, that's the case. You know, it's just hard work that's fulfilled or presented itself in a certain way that, you know, makes you happy. Yeah. How close are you to them? To my daughter? Pretty close. She just had a baby. She's in the Bay Area. She's has me pictures all the time. Aww. Okay. What's your favorite thing about being a parent? Just being able to be with my kids. That's great. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Okay. Goodbye. Bye. Those are so cool. Yeah? Okay, cool. I'm going to go get my baby. I'm going to go ahead and shut the recording down.