looking at you all right okay so now let's make sure the Xbox connect is picking you up we'll just move around we have to wait till this guy pops up as like a little green skeleton it's going it's going there we go perfect okay and then I'll start this recording as well okay when this is done she'll let you know and you can just hit the doorbell to let me know hi I'm Ellie thanks for coming in today I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment think of me as a friend I don't judge I can't I'm a computer I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you I'll ask a few questions to get us started and please feel free to tell me anything your answers are totally confidential where are you from originally I'm from New York City and I moved to the US and then I moved down here eventually for college how easy was it for you to get used to living in LA it's like a long time to I've been living here for about a year since I graduated so there's been a lot of ups and downs but finally gotten adjusted to it so it took a while though how do you like your living space? it goes off and on I have two roommates and there's always a little bit of drama here and there between the girls but for the most part after a year and a couple months I think we finally learned how to live together but it was pretty much like a reality TV show for a while how do you know them? one's from college and the other one was found on Craigslist how close are you to them? it varies depending on the situation but I think I'm pretty close to them whether or not we're mad at each other so I guess pretty close right now we're kind of distant tell me more about that about the distance? yeah okay well we haven't seen each other we haven't hung out in like two weeks because one of them got into like this car accident and so she's been distant since then and kind of lost her temper and stuff so I don't know if she's still with us or not but I think we're pretty close. she locks herself up in her room and the other one is always working late so our scheduling has been off and no one's really made an attempt to hang out with anyone so it's kind of we're just waiting for someone I guess to make the first move that sucks yeah it's okay we'll get better yeah how are you at controlling your temper? i don't think so It depends with whom I'm dealing with, I guess I would say. With some people, I guess with my family, it's not very good. My boyfriend, it's not very good. But with other people that I might not know so well, then I'm able to control it a little bit more, but a little bit more passive aggressive rather than like full on anger. Why? Oh, because I don't want them to see me as a bitch. That makes sense. Yeah. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? Probably my best friend, Nicole. She's probably been, we've been best friends for like, god, since high school, freshman year of high school is when we first met. So long time. So yeah. Can you give me an example of that? Of what? Of what? I don't know. I don't know. How do you know them? My friend, Nicole. Yeah. We met in French class freshman year of high school. We were in the same class, and then we kind of started doing homework together, and we had a lot of class in the same classes together. And so we just kind of started hanging out, and then we just became closer, and have stayed really close since then. Nice. Mm-hmm. What are some things you like to do for fun? So I really like to play video games. Going out with friends, going to the bars, going dancing, biking, hiking, staying active, going to the movies, going out to either restaurants, photography, just hanging out with friends, I guess. Whatever. Okay. How close are you to your family? It varies. Like, I'm really close to them when it comes to things about like school, work, you know, work, those kinds of things. But when it comes to relationships and friendships and more personal, personal things, I don't want to discuss that with them. So I guess superficially close. But I rely on them a lot. So we're close, I guess. That's good. Anything else? What are some things that make you really mad? That's a good question. I don't know. I guess it depends who it is, again. I guess people who are inconsiderate, unthoughtful, flaky, ignorant, and yeah, I guess those kinds of people. And then people just, what makes me mad is a good question. I guess a lot of things make me mad. But it's mostly how people feel. People react to different situations can make me angry, I guess. Yeah. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? Oh, yesterday. And it was my boyfriend. And we argued because he's trying to be healthy and work out and save money. And so by doing that, what he does is he orders pizza in. So he's not saving money and he's not being healthy. And so I got frustrated with him because I'm constantly trying to push him to be healthy and then each time he goes, I'm going to do it, I'm going to do it, and then he doesn't. So he's constantly breaking promises. That's another thing that makes me angry is people who don't follow through. Yeah. Do you feel that way often? About other people or about myself or angry? Whatever comes to your mind. I don't know how bad. Um. Angry? I can still go with that. No, I don't feel angry often. Okay. What's your dream job? Dang it. That is a tough one. How about just getting paid to be me? I don't know. That's kind of what I'm trying to figure out right now because I quit my full-time job because I hated it. I was just mostly sitting in an office all day, which I thought was a great job. I was extremely boring. So now I work in a restaurant job and I'm trying to look for a second job to support myself. My dream job, I don't know what it would be, but I know it would involve people and I'd love to have some kind of like finished product or some kind of accomplishment towards the end. And you have to say something that I realized I like to see the result from all my hard work. Because I majored in sociology and as much as I loved that major, it's like I'm going in generally. But it was in the past and like honestly, it was like a thought process without making up både steps and planning ahead butognot technologies Originally, I was deeper into the future, and since November 2022 I have been planning my next career or so. Maybe with my passion – or maybe the diversity ofな job maybe that is away from my years – probably an experience, I'll say that's theésite on there though. And that's the Certain Sense in it. Yes. Rome, I guess. Okay. Do you travel a lot? I used to travel a lot. My family is known for traveling. We've gone to, gosh, seven, eight different countries. I've lived in three or four different countries. Wow. I haven't traveled a lot lately just because I have no money, and jobs kind of tie you down. But I would love to have that. I guess my dream job would be a photographer for National Geographic. That would be awesome. Yeah. Or a food photographer that travels. That would be awesome, too. But anyways, yeah, I do travel a lot. What do you enjoy about traveling? The new places, new faces, new experiences. I get restless very easily, so it's nice to constantly be on the move and see different things and see different cultures and types of people and just not feel like I'm alone. I don't get stuck in the same routine. I hate the routine and mundaneness of everyday life, so it's nice to throw things up. I see what you mean. I'd love to hear about one of your trips. Oh, gosh. Okay. I'm trying to think. One of my trips. I don't know if we can talk about, I don't know, it's funny. Even though I've been to lots of different countries, one of my most memorable trips is one of the trips I took with my family. It was a three-week road trip with my family. There's five of us packed in a tiny little station wagon. Oh, my gosh. I know. Needless to say, it's like when you're that close proximity for three weeks camping, you start getting on each other's nerves. But it was really fun. And even though I've traveled so many places, I realize that there's such a beauty in the American landscape. And so we were all around the Southwest, from the Grand Canyon to Zion to the Grand Tetons to Yellowstone. And it was absolutely amazing just seeing all that natural beauty. And we saw a grizzly bear, black bear, lots of bison, a wolf. It was really cool. I don't know, natural wonders also really amaze me because those things aren't man-made. And as pretentious as it sounds, after a while, Europe kind of gets, not old, but it's like, you know, you get the same idea. Like old white men building great buildings and artwork. And it's beautiful and all, but you just kind of like, okay, I want to see something that's natural and beautiful or something that's different, too. Yeah. I see what you mean. Cool. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Um, pretty easy as long as I get to, well, I always sleep. So easy. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Oh, grumpy and just very lethargic and just low energy. Don't say much. I'm just kind of off in my own world. Do you feel that way often? Not anymore. I usually get enough sleep, and I've been working out more, so it's kind of energizing me. So, no, it's not too bad. That's good. Yes. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? I guess I've just been more negative, but that has to do with life circumstances, kind of like, uh, it's been about almost five months since I quit my full-time job, haven't found anything else, haven't really found anything else I'm interested in. So it's more just like, oh, what am I doing, da-da-da, that kind of thing. Yeah. It can be tough to find a good job these days. Yeah. It is hard. And it's like I'm very picky because I don't want to just sit in my own cubicle. Because I quit my job exactly for that reason. So why go back to another job just to do the same exact thing that I quit my other job for? So it's just like I have to make it worthwhile that I quit my last job to get a better job. So it's just kind of like stuck in this section of just like living paycheck, living life, and then I'm like, oh, I'm going to quit. I'm going to go back to paycheck, barely making it, just waiting for the right opportunity to come across. But it's like when do I give up and sell my soul and go back to the corporate world of sitting in little cubicles? I don't know. That sounds really hard. Yeah, it is hard. But I mean, I guess everyone goes through that same situation after college. So, but I guess it's tough because a lot of my friends, because I went to a pretty good school, and, you know, I have a friend who's teaching English in Afghanistan. Another one who's met the president, you know, and one that's doing Teach for America. Another friend who's in Harvard School, like Harvard, you know, getting her master's. So it's kind of like, ah, all that comparison. And then here I am working at a little restaurant job, so. Yeah. Do you feel down? I do sometimes, yes. But I'm going to Hawaii next week, so right now I'm fine. Nice. Yes. But, yeah, usually it's been kind of like down because I'm just trying to find, like, what am I supposed to, you know, like, what do I want to do next? And, like, money situations are just very stressful, especially when you have school loans to pay off, insurance, rent, car loans, like, and some groceries. Like, I can't even afford groceries. So it's just hard to, like, live this way, especially after you've paid so much money for, like, amazing college education. So it's a little bit frustrating. But there's a lot of people in the same situation. Yeah. I'm sorry. It's all good. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Ah, no, I don't think so. But, I mean, I think everyone goes through depression here and there. So I don't know if you can, but not, like, medically diagnosed. I'm not on meds. Okay. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? Nope. Have you ever served in the military? Nope. Okay. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Oh, to try lots of different things and not be afraid to fail. Because I'm one of those people, if I'm not going to be the best at something, then I'm just not going to try. I accept the best or nothing at all. Go big or go home. So, but I think I would have told my high school self to go and try lots of things, even if it means I'm not going to be the best at it. So, 10 years ago. What's 12? Well, that would have made me, like, 12. So, um, I used to do a lot of things. I used to act. I think I would have continued doing that. I used to write a lot when I was younger. I used to write miniature, like, little stories, short stories from my parents all the time. And I kind of stopped doing those things because I was like, oh, I'm not good at it, so I'm not going to do it. Now, I'm going to try to do it. And I think that I've just continued doing those things. I've tried, you know, different classes, um, I don't know, different sports. I kind of just stuck with soccer growing up. But I don't know. I just expand myself more rather than, like, find something I'm good at and just stay with it, but never really try harder. Kind of like a stay. I always kind of say that one level of, once I'm good, I just stay for good. I don't try to go above that. Does that make any sense? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What do you do to relax? I don't know. Right now it's super lame, but I watch TV. But I used to read, I used to read in my off time or just listen to music or just take a nap or bake. But now it's just like, since I'm on my feet all day and, like, constantly interacting with people, I just kind of want to unwind by, like, sitting and lying on the couch and being like, I'm done. So, um, that's my, that's my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my, my. What's one of your most memorable experiences? That's a tough question. Probably the day I got accepted into Pomona College. I was a freshman at Wellesley College, which is a women's college back east, and I hated I just knew that I chose the wrong college and I was miserable for the entire year. And I only applied to one school to transfer at Pomona College, that's out in Claremont. And I didn't think I was going to get in because it was a 4% acceptance rate and I was like, what are the chances? This is ridiculous. I don't think I'm going to get in. And I was like, you know, the thought of going back to Wall Street was super depressing. But then I got an email from one of the admissions counselors that I had met when I was visiting Pomona. And he was like, hi Tatiana, just wanted to see if you had any last minute questions about Pomona. Hope all is well. And I was like, why would you be emailing me the day we find out if we got accepted or not? Unless I got the acceptance. And so sure enough, a couple hours later, I got the email that I was accepted into Pomona. And that was the best day of my life. I was so happy. That's great. Yeah. It was awesome. Then I took my mom and my little brother out to dinner and I went and bought myself some new dresses. Went crazy, dyed my hair, pierced my nose. I was like, let's start this whole thing over. Awesome. Yeah. How would your best friend describe you? Lovely, fun, maybe moody. You never know what you're going to get sometimes. Probably friendly and pretty like a positive person. But sometimes maybe a little bit. Aggressive. But most probably think positive things. I mean, she's my best friend. So. Okay. When was the last time you felt really happy? Really happy. Oh, when I was in Mexico. Over winter. Well, no, I don't know. My boyfriend took me on this sailing trip down in San Clemente and that was really fun. And we just like went sailing and walked around the missions, hung out at the beach. That was really fun. That was a good time. That was a great situation. Yeah. That was cool. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Okay. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Goodbye. Bye. I'm going to share. I don't know where she put the thing. Hi. Hello. Hi. Hello.