All right. That looks good. Now I'm going to do something that seems to be pretty fun. So I'm going to put this in front of the camera. Now I'm going to go ahead and set up the virtual camera. Okay. So she's going to chat with you. Okay. And then when you're done, she'll let you know when the time is over. Okay. So I'm going to press this button. All right. All right. Thank you. Thank you. Yes, it's okay. Are you doing anything? Fine. Where do you live? I live in Hollywood. Where are you from and where are you from? Seattle. Seattle. How does it compare to a wedding? That's kind of a vague question. It's pretty simple. Seattle. It's kind of a largely different thing than Hollywood, but There's no change in the world. It's a different generation of natural phenomena. The two of them live in the same neighborhood. Why? Maybe that's my first job. You don't do flu basis. But you don't have to build aOld-fashioned telephone. I knew that. Why don't you sign up for that? Why are you staying at home? Yeah. What, flying on an airplane? Probably December of 1986 or 87. I must have heard that on your text. Nothing much to tell, really. Usually I just go from L.A. up to Seattle and up to Vancouver. That's probably the main thing I do. Take the train. Awesome. How often do you go back to L.A.? Not very often. Once every five years or so. Do you have any other questions? Oh, yeah, sure. Absolutely, yeah. What do you do in your day-to-day life? It depends on what. It is that I'm annoyed by. It could be anything. It depends. Can you say a little more about that? It depends on whether it's a something or a someone. You know, if it's a someone, I mean, I don't get physical towards them, but I mean, it depends on what they've done to piss me off. I mean, I'm certainly not above shouting at them for whatever reason. So it just depends. How are you at keeping them in? I'm not above, you know, in terms of lashing out at other people physically. I don't do that, but in order to let off some aggressions, if need be, I'm not above, you know, punching a wall or punching something nearby. I mean, I'm not trying to. This as long as it doesn't physically hurt me, but, you know, just get some steam, let off some steam. That's normal for me. Okay. When was the last time you had an argument with someone? Uh, face-to-face, uh, hmm. Can't remember. It's been a long time. But I mean, I argue with people online about stupid shit. You know, that's normal shit, but as far as, like, face-to-face, you know, it's been a long time. Okay. Okay. Currently or overall? Which one? You mean someone I'm in contact with now or someone from maybe from my past? Which is it? Okay. My mom had a boyfriend when I was a teenager. He was like a father figure. I don't know. I was about 14. So he was a pretty positive influence. Oh. At first I didn't understand. Not at all. Okay. What's your team job? To, uh, open up a record shop. Really? Yeah. What do you do now? Uh, well, I'm a musician. I'm an unemployed office worker right now. As in what? Doing what? Be more specific. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. Going on a first date with a girlfriend back in 2007 when we first met. Awesome. Tell me more about that. I just made arrangements to meet her and her daughter and her daughter's friends at the Queen Mary in Long Beach. We all had to spend the evening, the day and evening together, hanging out and eating dinner and stayed at their hotel. We didn't know each other that way. How did you know them? That was the beginning of our relationship at the time. That's how I knew her. She was my girlfriend at the time. Do you have a boyfriend? Currently? Yeah, I do. How do you like your relationship? I don't. It sucks balls. I hate having roommates. It sucks. What's it like being with them? In some ways it's okay because they don't see me that much because I'm not really around them. Other times I need to have my own space. It's difficult for me that way. We get along. We get along. I don't really see them that much and that's by design. What do you do for a living? I like to be alone. Sometimes I read. I just like to be alone. Maybe just doing nothing. It just depends. Have you ever served in the military? No. Have you ever been in a military? No. Have you ever done any military operations? No. Have you ever spent any time in the military? I'm sorry, repeat that? Have you ever spent any time in the military? No, not necessarily. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Very. I'm a heavy sleeper. How do you feel down? I don't know that I would call it down but I'm not necessarily what you would call cheery. But I don't know that I'm necessarily down. Do you do that that way often? Yeah, all the time. When was the last time you felt really happy? It's hard to say. I don't know. I'm not sure. What was the biggest thing you learned about the military? I don't know that I really want the one to ask. You know, I think you have to ask someone else about that. You know, I have a difficult time answering that question. What was the most proud of in the military? The most proud of? Mm-hmm. The most proud of? Mm-hmm. The most proud of? The most proud of? Mm-hmm. Didn't fall into drugs like a lot of other people that I know. That's great. Mm. What are some things that you do that you can't do in the military? Listening to music on vinyl. Nice. Being around dogs. Yeah. Tell me about something that you can't get to do in the military. What? Spending New Year's Eve with a friend, a real close friend. Can you tell me about that? Not really. What do you think of the New Year's Day? I'm glad I don't have any. I think they're, especially here in Los Angeles, I, they don't have any. driving that i can't stand uh... i assume you mean post high school uh... uh... briefly just sick basic uh... i take uh... this general study that from i remember i i i i actually didn't finished i quit to uh... uh... play the bands i i i i skipped a lot of school so i didn't really it now but nothing uh... there's a junior college community college says i didn't go to university so this do what stop going i just wasn't interested my interest where else elsewhere so i decided to go it in terms of what answer and answer whether something and i'm not going to specific answer the things that we go into it uh... twenty years ago and well ten years ago uh... uh... i'm not sure it's hard to say it's hard to say kept it come back to that i don't have a best friend these days we need to continue definition of friend uh... i don't uh... i don't have to meet people united i had best i had a so called best friend friend you know but that was like 20 years 20 some odd years ago you know I don't really I'm very much a loner these days so I I don't really have what you would consider a best or really close friend you know I just don't have that okay yeah yeah