Should I move my arms around? Oh. Oh. Oh. Interesting. And if it's not, it would say, don't answer that. I don't want to answer that. Just remember that's all. Okay. Do I push a button to start or does she start on her own? Okay. Impressive. Yes. Fine. How about you? Here. Yes. The weather. The weather. The weather mainly. Yeah, the weather. Sorry. Not the people, but some of the people. Stuff like that. Some people, yeah. Okay. I'm cutting you off. Not as much as I used to. Why? I used to be in school and used to travel a lot of places for conferences and things like that, but I'm not in school right now. Later I'll get back into school and I'll travel more. But right now, no doubt. Do you enjoy traveling? I don't. I don't enjoy traveling. What did you study at school? That's a good question. You're actually pretty good. I studied physics and aerospace engineering, but physics mainly. Are you still working on that? Yes, I am, actually. What do you do now? Right now I teach community college physics and astronomy. But I still do research in physics also because I like that type of thing. And I'm going back to grad school. Hopefully that's why I'm nervous sometimes on the questionnaire. Awesome. Impressive. Good job. Professor at a place like USC or UCLA or something like that, where the professors do three hours of work a week and the grad students do the rest. You're actually pretty good at this. There's a lot of people. The first one, I guess, is my physics teacher, AP physics teacher in high school. Even though he led me to be an engineer instead of a physics major, he still was a very good influence. He told me, you know, he's the first one who taught me that school is not about a grade but about learning. Okay. I'm pretty good, I think. I'm single, so I don't get many arguments. But it's probably my brother about he doing things too, playing a video game together. I know I'm pretty old to play video games, but they're actually pretty good. It's probably something like that. And me getting angry at him and him trying to defend himself and me being right. That's all. Barely close. I see them pretty often. Parents, I see them a couple times a week. They're getting older, so I help them eat groceries and things like that. And my brother, I see the same with them. Same with them. Same with them. Same with them. My sister, I tutor her kids, my nephews. So I see them about once a week or so. Interesting. Yes. Because I spend long periods of time doing math and reading and not talking to anybody. That's introverted. That's introverted. I guess I play. I play video games or and I work out. I work out, I think, a lot. I try to at least. I roll my eyes, which I've been told is a bad thing. And that's about it, I think. Okay. What do you think is the biggest thing? Bad parenting. Why are parents more selfish? But basically, parents are more self-centered, more under themselves I like previous generations and the kids just do what they want because parents aren't there for the parents are being passed icy by in my personal opinion. Well, I guess they're like old friends to me, you know, I haven't heard of any school of law. I guess... Thank you. I don't really have a best friend. Introvert, remember. I'm biased, obviously. But they are... I'm really good in math. I'm not really sure if you can't... Not saying you can't get better than me in math, but the thing is, it's just that you get a certain confidence with it where no matter what it is you need to learn in math, you've always figured it out. I am patient, I think. And I am disciplined where I can spend... I can spend many hours, many, many, many hours reading books that might not be important, but they might be important, so I have to do it anyway. That type of thing. When I... A good workout. Doing well in video games, small, middle, things like that. When something happens with my research type thing, mathematical or physics type thing, when it goes well, that puts me in a good mood. Thank you. Right now, is the fact that... research. That I did make it this far... research-wise, that's all. That's all. Interesting. When you start off in school, you read about Einstein and things like that, he says general relativity and you hear about particle physics, you have no idea what it is. You know it's very complicated, things like quantum mechanics. And you still haven't realized you're interested in that, but you're not sure you're interested in that. You're not sure you can actually make it. And eventually, each step of a lot of time goes by, you... As time goes on, you get closer and closer, you make the goal, you realize you are just not as good as Einstein, but you are up there, you can do research in physics, you can add to advanced knowledge in science, and that's impressive that you don't see yourself doing that when you're a kid. Okay. Okay. A few weeks ago when I got a good grade in the class. Thank you. Yes, briefly. Many years ago. Yes. I don't know. Just I was growing up, I always thought that was, I always thought it was my dream when I was a kid. That's why. And I just went about doing that. Okay. How old were you when you were in the military? Were you married when you were in the military? How did you get into the military? I don't think it did. I think it's just something you grew up, something about, something I grew up already expecting to be, something that didn't really change me as much. What did you do after you were in the military? Graduate school in physics. Okay. Have you ever been in a military? No. Have you ever been in a military? No. How easy is it to get into the military? It depends if I work out really hard the day before. If I work out pretty hard, it's bad. But if I don't work out, I don't know, it's hard. I guess moderately. Thank you. Do you work out very often? Yes. It's okay. What are you like when you're in the military? Probably like I am now. Normal. I think not as happy about everything, but still pretty okay. I still function. Have you ever studied anything in the military? Maybe. Maybe. No. Maybe slightly. Sorry. No. Yes. Yes, I have changes in my thoughts. Okay. Tell me more about that. I'm applying to grad school again. It's been a while. And slightly different. And slightly different. I'm really apprehensive. Happy that it looks good, but apprehensive that it might not be good. And things like that. What do you mean by that? I know it's your computer. But as in how hard is it to deal with these thoughts? Or how hard is it to go into grad school? I understand. I don't know if I'm the right person. Okay. I agree. Okay. . No, not really. . What advice would you give yourself . . . . . . . . probably, keep doing what you're doing. Even though I'm not that old believe it or not. 20 years ago I was probably 15. No? No. Yeah, I was 15. Just keep doing what you're doing. I think I was very lucky and fortunate the way it worked out. If it was a little bit different, I don't think it would work out so well. Even though it's not perfect now, I think we're doing really well, personally. Thank you. Same here. Goodbye. I'll keep this on. Take this off now? Yeah.