Don't I look gorgeous? Let me straighten up a little bit here. Okay, so I'm just going to do something that syncs our equipment. Okay, now you're going to chat with her for a bit, and then when you are done, I'm going to give you the doorbell again, and I'm going to put it right over there. Okay. When she says you're done talking, if you just want to ring it to let me know. Okay. Thank you. Mm-hmm. Yes. Are you doing today? Quite well. I feel good. That's good. Where are you from originally? Los Angeles, California. Here. Really? Mm-hmm. One of the few native-born Los Angelians. What do you do now? I homeschool my 10-year-old son, and I'm a homemaker. I have five children and married two. I've been a homemaker for 22 years. Wow. Mm-hmm. So that's a full-time job. Huh? Can you travel a little? Somewhat. We went to Israel about two months ago for a pilgrimage with our church, yeah, so I would say yes, I've traveled a bit. I'd love to do a little more trip. Well, most recently, like two months ago, we went to Israel for a pilgrimage. We were gone about nine days. and it was fabulous it was we spent the first five days in Chorazin which is near the Galilee and in a place called I mean the name of the area is Chorazin but we stayed in a place called the Domas Galilea which is a a house for that welcomes Christian pilgrims as well as Jewish pilgrims I enjoy like really the most important thing I enjoy is like meeting the people and and of course seeing the the history especially Israel I mean it's a it's totally ancient but most I enjoy is is the the people I think to get a better understanding of how different cultures are and how different cultures are and how different cultures are live no not at all just don't I you know all my life I've always been open and and willing to socialize and I remember my younger brother always joking saying that I would talk to anybody and I will I'll talk to anybody just about anybody just because I enjoy learning about other people most of the time by the end of the day after I've cooked dinner and we've had dinner together as a family I there's a word game on the computer that I like to play for a little while and then um watch tv have a cocktail with my husband and just relax that's what we do and you know because we have a lot going on we don't stay up too late so I like to watch crime dramas um really mad probably not a lot um I get frustrated with for example my daughter does not clean up her room almost ever so that that gets me angry but um in terms of like really um getting like heatedly angry I mean other than like little things that my children do you know especially my oldest child who's 21 you know he can be confrontational so other than that nothing really gets me like really angry haven't I have haven't felt that what's the best thing about being a parent um contributing to society helping helping to raise um responsible people I guess um and of course the love and the affection and the um the fun and the excitement that goes with it and all the stages that go I mean like really right now I'm in a stage where my children uh are either adults or teenagers I only have I have one 11 year old and the rest are all teenagers and adults so it's really fun because we're able to talk about current events and all kinds of stuff that's going on in the world and you know have have challenging discussions and that sort of thing so it's it's a different level than when you're taking care of babies and you know changing diapers and that kind of stuff the hardest thing is that it's 24 7 um you're never not a parent you know it's and so you have to accept that and that's i remember when i first with my first child um thinking you know when i brought him home from the hospital this is it i mean there's no going back you cannot um change i mean i guess you could if you did something horrible but um i mean in normal circumstances you can't change um that and it's a permanent thing and um it it uh in some ways it takes away your freedom but in other ways it gives you a different sort of freedom always i'm sorry i didn't get what you said um some of the things that have been a positive influence in my life most importantly my church um and my faith uh but also my husband he's been a really um he's kind of he's very like logical thinking and very you know grounded so if i get emotional or i get upset about something he's always we balance each other out likewise if he gets upset about something i'm able to balance him out so it's been a very positive influence in my life and i think it's been a very um a great gift in my life um i don't i i don't think i'd be categorized as somebody with a a temper um occasionally i i occasionally i get angry but i don't like have like rarely do i have outbursts um i'm more more likely to you know to say what i feel not let it build up so it would be a great gift for me to be able to say what i feel about myself you know like my husband and i don't rarely fight like have arguments that are you know yelling and screaming or anything like that it almost never happens because i like i said i'm more of a type of person that communicates on the spot so if i'm thinking something i usually communicate it right away instead of letting it build up um usually i'm arguing with my older son because he um you know he thinks he knows everything he's 21 years old so he has the know-it-all mentality and i'm just telling him that he doesn't know it all and you know as life goes on he'll learn more and he's very confident and very self uh self uh what's the word self-assured and so he thinks that you know everything he does is correct and he still has a lot of learning to do that's all mm-hmm it is it can be i think um that many of them are um spoiled and live in an environment of um of instant gratification um which i think is going to be um detrimental to the to the future of this country but um you know given that with all the technology we have there's really not a lot of technology that we can use to do that there's really not any way to go back so i i have um hope that um they will i mean i think this country was built on on hard work and and ethics and uh hopefully our our the next generation and the generations after that can maintain that um that standard of living i don't know if it's possible um how would your best friend be um as loving nurturing um funny we laugh a lot and um caring honest things that um i mean my best i have well actually my best friend is it's two people It's two sisters that I grew up with and we, I for some years took care of their mother who has Alzheimer's before my parents got sick. So I had a very close, have a very close relationship with them, still do. And so I'm considered the fourth sister. So I would say that those are my best friends and we love each other very much. It's a good relationship. No. No. Yes. Mostly, minorly depression, it was more anxiety. Probably, it's probably been five or six years. I mean, I've had it off and on all my life, but it was never diagnosed originally. Like as a teenager, I think is when I first had, started to have Alzheimer's and then I had Alzheimer's. I started with the anxiety, but other than that, I, you know, so depression kind of goes with anxiety if it's not under control. But now it's under control. So I have a great. Huh? No, I think it was what they call free floating anxiety, more of a organic reason for it. In other words, that there was a chemical imbalance. And I think it was just because I was so stressed. I think it was because I was so stressed. So I think it was because I was so stressed. I've been feeling pretty good, actually. The holidays were great. We had a good family gatherings. A little stressed because we're making a big decision right now to help my parents out. My dad is really sick and we've offered to move in with them. They have a big home, but we would have to do a lot of some renovation and some to help and some obviously moving around. And so we're in the throes of that. And so that's a big, big change. But I'm looking forward to it because I really don't want my parents to be alone as they get. They're in their 80s. So as they get closer to death, I want to have my family there with them. Not easy. Not easy. Not easy. Not easy. Not easy. All my life, I think I've always, I mean, I've always had, at least I wake up at least once in the middle of the night to go to the bathroom, basically. And other than that, I mean, no, now I sleep well. I mean, other than that, I sleep well. But sometimes if I wake up like really early in the morning, then I can't go back to sleep. I'll get up and maybe do some work on the computer and then go back to bed and go back to sleep. It depends on what my schedule is and if the kids are... Have to be to school early and there's a lot of factors. That's tough. Yeah. Sometimes it does. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Probably basically the same. I think I might complain a bit like, oh, I'm tired or my body hurts or whatever, you know. But I think overall I'm probably the same. My kids know. I'll tell my kids, oh, I'm really tired. And they'll understand. They'll calm down. Like my older daughter will be really helpful. And maybe my other daughter will try to cook dinner or something like that. So, you know, they may pitch in a little bit more. Yeah. Not really. Not, no, no. Not really. Not anything significant. Huh? Yeah. Um, actually, yes, I do. I do feel like therapy is useful. Tell me more about that. Um, well, uh, we had a situation with my daughter. Um, she also suffers from anxiety. And, um, we have had her in therapy for some time. And we just recently, we're about to finish a group with her. It was a six-month, um, uh, group for DBT, it's called. And it's like a, it's the first time they, it's the first time they're documenting using it with teenagers. And, um, it's been really good. It's been very helpful. It's just all about how to live in the moment and how to, you know, actual physical and mental, um, strategies to keep your, uh, keep you from, your mind from going crazy, you know, worrying about things or, you know, in this case, some of the kids have tried to harm themselves or whatever. So. Um, that's the focus of the therapy. And it's been really good. My husband and I both have been going with our daughter. And it's been really, um, really informational and really helpful, I think. That's so good to hear. What got you into the call? Oh, my daughter was, um, she was in a bad way. She was, you know, suffering a lot. And we knew it. And, um, we acted on it. That's all. That's great. When was the last time you felt really happy? Um, like, really joyful and happy, I would say. Probably, I mean, probably it would be in Israel when we renewed our marriage vows in the, the, in Cana. So, um, you know, where the wedding of Cana took place. That was really. Moving and beautiful. Um, and it was, it happened that our anniversary was, we left on our anniversary day. We flew to Israel. So, it was right at the same time. It was beautiful. Very meaningful. And other than that, I would say, you know, like, uh, other joyful occasions have been, you know, like Christmas and, you know, family gatherings and, you know, my dad's birthday. He turned 83 on Christmas Eve. You know, that kind of thing. So. Um. Um. That's an interesting question. I would say, um, once I get, like, things done that I need to do, like, if I'm, have a lot of, a lot of either work to do around the house or errands to run, once I get them done, I feel like. Yeah. Yeah. It's a sense of accomplishment. You know, much like, I mean, I worked for many years as an administrative manager at UCLA. And, um, you know, once you get a project done or you get your, whatever, month-end stuff done or there's a lot of different things that you have to make deadlines. There's that feeling of, like, yeah, I got it done, you know. So, I think that would be, you know, for me, the most, um, most recent, um, way of feeling good and feeling. You know, like, feeling accomplished. What's your dream job? Dream job? Hmm. I think I've already lived it. I'm also a birth doula. And, um, yeah. And, um, so I've attended a lot of births. And now I really only do it for family and friends. And, um, it's the most rewarding thing you could possibly ask to be involved in is the birth. It's the bringing of new life into this world. So, I would say that's probably, was my, was a dream job and I didn't know it. I trained much after, you know, I did my managerial stuff. And, um, it was, it is and was awesome. So, I don't work at a hospital anymore. Actually, the hospital that I worked at is now closed. But, um, like I said, I do it for family and friends. What made you decide to do it? Um. Um. I attended. I attended a friend of mine's birth by accident. She, she happened to have the same OB as I did with all my children. And, um, I came to bring food for her husband when she was in labor. We were, you know, close friends. And, you know, her labor picked up quite a bit when I got there. She wanted me to stay. She didn't want me to leave. I hadn't planned on it. So, that was the first birth that I attended outside of, you know, myself giving birth. Which is a whole different experience. So, after that, I was born. I was really interesting and interested in possibly studying nurse midwifery. But then, I discovered this thing called being a doula. Which is, really gives you even a lot more hands-on, one-on-one contact with the patient. Which is what I like. So, I trained to do that at a hospital in Inglewood. Um. About 15 years ago. Because my son is 15 and he was a year old. No, 16 years ago. So, um. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I've been. How long has it been? Um. Well, it can be challenging in terms of hours. It depends on how long the woman's in labor. But. And, you know, also like. For me, I always tell my friends and family if they want me to be their doula that I cannot guarantee 100%. I'm not doing it for business. And that way. And because of that, I don't have like backup doulas that in case I'm sick or I'm not available. Somebody else could fill in for me. So. Um. But. So far, it's been that. That all the women that have asked me, I've been able to be there for some reason. So the. Um. The. The only one that I missed was one. A friend of mine from church who wanted me to go with her second baby. I was with her for her first. But her labor went so fast she didn't even call me. It was in the middle of the night and she was like two hours of labor. She would. Even if she had called me, I would have been there in time. So. Um. Went really fast. But other than that. You know. Um. Yeah. I've been. Been able to attend. All the births of people that have asked me to do. Um. In all of life? Or. In your job? Uh. Probably my. My own birth. I mean. My. The birth of my own children. Um. Like there's an extreme. Sense of joy. Excitement. Relief. Because of course you're out of the pain. And then like. It's just. It's just a matter of. You know. Going forward from there. But it's. It's like something you can't explain. It's. It's just. It's awesome. After you give birth. So. And I've experienced both ways. I've done both. Um. Natural and. I. My last child was by a C-section. So I've had both. Both. Um. Experiences. And. Um. That's where it all began. With my third child. I had kind of a crazy nurse. She was a little psychotic. But other than that. We laugh about it now. But when I was in labor. It wasn't funny, and she. She was not there when the doctor. I mean, it was. My my third child was. Born very quickly after he broke the water. my husband was there but she was not nor was the doctor and she got in a lot of trouble because i only had like two contractions after that and my daughter was born in the bed so for me it was great because i didn't have to go through any other labor but um i'm sure they weren't happy i have to fill out a lot of paperwork after that so now would i give myself for 10 or 20 years ago um 10 or 20 years ago i was probably more not as um relaxed not as um like i feel now at my age that um i i don't have the same concerns that i did then i don't worry about uh i don't worry at all about what people think about me i don't worry at all about what you know you know like my i noticed my daughter's oh mom you can't wear that because people are going to say this i say i don't care you know but they do because it's still in their frame of mind that oh mom you have to dress like this or just like that or whatever so that would probably be it the wisdom that you you achieve with age that you you see how life is and you know it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's it's there's so many things that are more important in life than worrying about little things most proud of um probably my family my husband and my my children i mean the fact that we've stayed married that we've we're an intact family that um my kids see every day how their friends suffer who who come from divorced families or single parents and they um they actually express gratitude sometimes that we are married and we still you know we are still a family so i would say that's probably it that's great what would you say is your best qualities um probably the one of my best qualities is uh being able to listen to people and being able to um not be judgmental um through the years i've had a lot of experience with um people with problems a lot of friends with problems people i know from church and it's just taught me that um everybody has weaknesses everybody has problems and um i don't think i'm better than someone else if you think you're better than someone else you're better than someone else you're better than someone else you're better than someone else you're better than someone else then that's usually um to me a sign that you don't know yourself well enough okay okay goodbye until then yeah