Okay. Okay. Okay. Alright. Yes. Yes. Okay, and you? In who at California? Yeah. No. It's okay. You mean my girlfriend and my daughter? Yes. They're okay. It's okay. It's cool. Yes, I do. Well, I'm a football recruiter, so I travel all around the world to sign different football players for our sports management company. Just the independence about it. Being alone. Being able to... To be free and not tied down to one... to one thing, you know. It's great. I remember traveling to... I remember traveling to... I don't know. I don't know what the hell it is. I don't know what it is. It's just that I came here to... ...and take them to clubs and this and that. And we're not that type of organization. I know it's a little crazy, but... I think I've heard that before. I think... I think there's a different type of organization. um dishonesty i don't like when people are dishonest uh that really really really bothers me and not true not honest not real um that that upsets me a lot um i tend to just try to free myself from the situation to clear my mind i'll usually take a walk or something like that or just just just go in the room by myself and just try to clear my head my head um i'm okay with it at times um but i can definitely be better oh uh i argued with my my lady a couple days ago and it was about our daughter and some of the things she's doing in school and she she wants to raise her one way and i think i want to raise her a kind of a different way and discipline her and i think that's what i'm going to do and i'm going to do it discipline her a little more on certain situations so i think different discipline is a big key in a kid's life and she she she was raised a little differently um i don't know just angry upset you know when you're in an argument that's what you feel so you do and say things that that that bother you and you just you go on with it um yeah a little bit um i don't know i just just the way i feel i don't know i can't really say just the way i feel um a little a little um i don't know just um realness um honesty truth just being real and straight out front um i'm pretty close um i'm pretty close with my family oh whole another subject just they're raised different um um i think society's going to become even wilder with the way the kids are raised and and the things they're doing everything we in the things they can do if that's how long you serve um k can't with the that's it's just uh education wise. I think it's just tough times for kids and the way they act. It's ridiculous to me. I definitely like to watch sports. I like to gamble. I like to travel. I like to skate. I like a guy that likes to see different sites and go different places. I'm a big movie person so I like going to theaters and stuff like that. I'm actually living it. I always wanted to be in some kind of sports. I'm in the sports industry and that's what I'm doing now. My goal is to get a little higher and a ladder and own my own sports management company. I'm doing pretty well for myself so I'm happy. Yeah. No. No. No. No. No. No. No. It's pretty easy. Irritated. Tired. I don't know. It's been a while. It's been a while. A couple weeks ago. Huh? What did you do? you say? No, not really. I think he would describe me as a stand-up guy. I try to be a good, loyal friend and an adult. I think he would describe me like that. School. Went to school. Grew up together. Been knowing all my friends for pretty much all my life. Yeah. Very close. My friends and I are very close. I'm very close to my friends. I'm very close. We pretty much do a lot together still at this age. I'm honest. I'm loyal. Very loyal. I'm a hard worker. I think I am, to a certain extent, I'm just not that average guy. I'm pretty much a different breed. I just carry myself and act a little different from a normal guy. I don't know. Just how I was raised and how my dad was kind of different. He didn't go within the crowd. I think I learned that from him a lot. It's the same path I took. Yeah. A lot of things I regret. I regret a lot of decisions in my life. Yeah. One, I actually let go of my family. I let go of my family. I let go of my family. A lady in my life go years ago that I felt was my soulmate. We had a big argument. One thing led to another. We decided to take a break. Then that break, I started dating somebody else. I told her I'm going to go my way and she go her way. I think that was a big, a bad decision. A very bad decision. Yeah. Totally. I think I could have took a step back. I think I could have gone back and really just thought about the situation a little more instead of being so upset and moving forward. I'm just upset. I tend to get upset and then my thoughts get clouded. I need to think a little more when I'm upset. I don't know. I don't know. I'm just experiencing time. Making up for your mistakes and being better about different decisions after you made the mistakes. Think a little harder about situations. The decisions that you make. Think a lot longer and harder before you make them. I think the outcome will be a little different today. My grandmother, she's always been a positive influence. She's a great black woman with old school. She's a great black woman. She's a great black woman. She's a great black woman. She's a Mulan woman. She's the best.荊ей. I just had been living. So, I think I've added that to my life. She's a great woman. And baseball. And yeah. I was a pretty good player. I was a pretty good athlete growing up. I was one of the top. And that started a future in athletics and that's what I wanted to do. So I accomplished my goals. At the time it was a great thing and still is a great thing. It's a great accomplishment in my life. Accomplishments, being able to, if I have a goal or something I'm supposed to do that week or that day and I accomplish it, it always puts me in a good mood. Or getting my job done and the way I'm doing it. Being able to do it in a timely fashion always puts me in a good mood. Being a positive role model right now for younger kids that's in our sports academy program. I think as I got older the thought process and the way I look at life has totally changed. I think a lot of kids can look up to me that I deal with now and say that's somebody that is a positive influence in my life. What was the most memorable thing you've done in your life? Oh, a couple days ago my football team were in the playoffs, made the playoffs. So that always makes me happy. Oh, thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Bye-bye. And thank you again for being here for a good Vio 되는 week. No problem. Thank you all.