Okay, my arms. Okay. I'm going to do something now. Perfect. All right, and now I'm going to start up the virtual human. She'll chat with you for a bit, and then she'll let you know when you guys are done. Okay. And I'm going to put the doorbell back over here so you can let me know when you're done. All right then. Okay, so now I'm going to go ahead and start the virtual human. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I'm just created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. I'm just here to help you. Are you okay with this? Yeah. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm okay. That's good. Where are you from originally? Chicago, Illinois. Really? Uh-huh. Why'd you move to LA? My husband's work was here. When'd you move to LA? In 84. How easy was it for you to get used to living in LA? It was really easy. It was not easy for me. It took about three years. Wow. Can you tell me about that? Just the move. I moved away from my family, so I was uncomfortable. I didn't know anyone here. And even though I did make friends, I just felt out of place. I see what you mean. How often do you go back to your hometown? Not as often as I would like. I used to go back at least once a year, but in the last few years, that's diminished. So, I would say that I've moved to LA. I would say like every three years. Okay. What are some things you really like about LA? The weather. I love the weather, the beach. As I've been here as long as I have, the people. Some nice people here. What are some things you don't really like about LA? The people. Some of the people. Yeah. Also, the people. I would say the economy. It's very difficult to make it here in Los Angeles. What did you study at school? Business and computer graphics. Are you still working in that? I'm not working in it right now. What do you do now? I'm working in retail. How did you decide to do that? I just couldn't find work, and so I had to settle for doing that for right now. It can be tough to find a good job these days. It's very tough. What's your dream job? I would like to be a human resource representative. That sounds interesting. Mm-hmm. Do you consider yourself an introvert? No. Why? I like to talk to people. I don't like to talk to people too much. When I understand or I know a lot about a subject, I can go on and on about it. I'm interested in finding out about people. If I'm sitting next to somebody, I'll strike up a conversation with them just to find out who they are. I like to talk to people. I enjoy it. That's great. What do you do when you're annoyed? I'm quiet. What are some things that make you really mad? Let's see. Rude people. People that harm children and the elderly. That makes me very angry. War. How are you at controlling your temper? I control my temper. I don't have a problem with that. I just get quiet when I feel angry, and I try to think before I act. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? The last time I argued with someone was about a month ago, and it was with my daughter. I was arguing with her over her therapy. She has cancer, and she wasn't telling me enough. She wasn't giving me enough information, and so that made me very angry. I was frustrated and angry. That sounds really hard. Yeah. It was very hard. Do you find it easy to be a parent? No. What's the hardest thing about being a parent? Watching your children fail when they're trying hard or seeing that they can hurt themselves and trying to prepare them for that when they won't listen to your advice. I feel like sometimes they need to trust me more. Yeah. What's the best thing about being a parent? Ah, the love of my children. Yeah. Your children got better? When was the last time you felt really happy? When I was playing with my granddaughter, and that was about a month ago. How did you feel in that moment? Very excited and happy, and just…all my cares were gone. Ally… I wasn't thinking about anything except for having fun with her so it was a good time Yeah, it's the best No Yes It was over five years ago I Couldn't function I couldn't drive I couldn't sleep I couldn't eat At my I couldn't do anything. I was completely Shut down I felt like I felt like I was looking out a window and and life was going on Outside that window and I was just stuck I behind the glass. I couldn't participate I Do something wasn't right but I Lately I've been feeling depressed I Haven't had a good night's sleep in a year. I would say I My regular pattern is to maybe sleep in and and sleep in a room An hour up to three hour intervals, and I just keep waking up and I never quite get into a deep sleep Groggy and I have no energy It's very hard because it's difficult to work it's difficult to concentrate I make mistakes and they forget a lot so I Try to train myself to Drinking a lot After drinking all day You know that doesn't mean that I'm alright Where to think and what to do and You know whether you do aัgway or not I see you Do you feel like there's a need for? I'm sorry, what? Do you feel like there's a need for? I'm not sure. Is going to a therapist helping you? Yes. What sort of changes have you noticed in your life? I feel more relaxed, and I feel like some of my worries are lifted from me. I can think clearer because I'm using the tools that I've learned through therapy. What are you most proud of in your life? My children. What would you say are some of your best qualities? I don't know. How would your best friend describe you? Friendly. That's good. What do you think of sitting with kids? I think it's just horrible. Can you tell me about that? I feel that the children are so neglected. They're so sad. I think that they are so sad. I think that they're so sad. I think that they're so sad. I think that we as a society, we forgot that it takes a village to raise a child, and nobody wants to pitch in. No one wants to help anymore. No one's helping their neighbor, and it's very sad. That's sad. Mm-hmm. What's one of your most memorable experiences? I don't know. What comes to your mind? Eating dinner with my family. That's so good to hear. Is there anything you regret? I regret not spending enough time on my education. How did you decide to do that? I had children very young. So I needed to take care of them. Have you done anything to avoid it? I'm sure I could have. Okay. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? To seek help. Okay. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? My grandparents. I'd love to hear all about it. They introduced me to church and just letting me play at their home and play in their garden. It just showed me a lot of love and I felt like I was cared for. That's great. Do you travel a lot? No. Okay. What are some things that usually put you in good mood? Listening to music, watching a funny program on TV. Okay. Going to school, working. Okay. What are some things you like to do for fun? Go to dinner with a friend. Okay. When was the last time that happened? Over a year ago. How do you know them? My friend. Mm-hmm. Through work. How close are you to them? Very close. Nice. Mm-hmm. Okay. I think I've asked everything. Okay. I think I've asked everything. I think I've asked everything. I think I've asked everything. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. You're welcome. Goodbye. Bye. Okay. You can actually take the mic off. Thank you.