Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Yes. Fine. Thank you. I'm originally from India. Yeah. I'm sorry? Why do I miss? Sorry? Why do I miss L.A.? Oh. About what? 20 years ago. Once every three four years. I mean the first six months it was a little difficult but then I got used to it then I feel very comfortable now. Yes. The food. Actually I enjoy flying then you know meeting different people, different scenes. You know then try to achieve my goals. I'm sorry. I used to run a business. I used to travel to meet people to get orders and that traveling involved going to Northeast. You know Ohio and Pennsylvania. Places like that. Meet top people. To get my to get orders for my business. And you know I enjoyed listening to their problems. I used to take them out for dinner. And you know. I really enjoyed genuinely enjoyed talking to talking to them. And many of them were open enough to tell me about their problems. And you know. All my but my main goal main main objective was to get the orders for the business. Nice. What do you do in your life? You know cook. Watch movies. Meet friends. Throw a party. Okay. What do you do now? I'm talking to you. What did you study in school? I'm an engineer. I did mechanical engineering. I'm also an MBA. Are you still working in that? Actually I branched off to finance. I trade stocks now. How did you get into finance? A friend of mine was you know making a lot of money in stocks. And you know I was first I used to you know interact with him. Also be with him when he was trading stocks. And I realized he was making a lot of money. Then I did a formal course in it. I attended a lot of seminars. Then you know lost a lot of money. And before I started. I started making money. What is the thing you like to do for fun? Oh it's the same thing that I said. You know watch movies. Go visit people. Play basketball. And do shopping. Cooking. Okay. How long do you live in California? I'm very good at that. You know even when I'm irritated. You know I'm very good at controlling my temper. That's great. When was the last time you argued with anyone? The last time I argued with was with my brother. It was about my dad. You know he was getting old. I mean he's getting old and he lives in India. And I was planning on bringing him here. My dad I mean my brother said it's going to be very expensive to you know. It's going to be very expensive with respect to health bills. And I was you know arguing with him that we should all pull in the money and get them here. Because they are quite old. I have a mom too. You know they're both old. How close are you to your family? I'm very close to my parents. Not so close with my brother and their family. Why? It's the I mean like I tend to be judgmental. And you know I think sometimes that my niece and nephew should have been brought up in a different way. And you know my brother doesn't seem to think along the same lines. And you know we have disagreements and you know that's the reason. Is there anything you can say about it? It is. Is there anything you can say about it? No. Not at this time. What do you think has been the case? What do I think of what? What do you think has been the case? Can you repeat that one more time? What do you think has been the case? You know I still couldn't follow you. Let's come back to that later. Okay. Have you ever been in a relationship? No. Have you ever been diagnosed with depression? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Yes. How long ago were you diagnosed? About one to two years ago. What made you decide to go into a relationship? I was feeling down and I was not interested in things that I was normally interested in. And you know I was sort of withdrawn. And I was not able to focus on my things. So I thought maybe I should go see a doctor and I ended up doing that. Did you have a common story about it? No. I lost appetite. I was not sleeping well. And I had difficulty concentrating. And I was not getting my assignments done on time. These were some of the problems. How have you been feeling lately? I've been feeling good. Do you still go to therapy now? No I don't. Why did you stop doing it? I started doing yoga. And I've been doing that for about a year. And meditation. And that's helped a lot. Awesome. What made you decide to do it? It's just that when I was diagnosed with depression I thought I shouldn't be taking any medication for it. And I was looking at other ways to get over the problem. And then I realized some of my friends were doing meditation. And I got influenced by them. How easy is it to do meditation and sleep? It's a little difficult. But often I've been able to sleep within half an hour. There are days when it takes almost one or two hours to go to sleep. Are you terrified of things? Are they what? Can you repeat that? Are you terrified of things? No. What are you like when you don't do meditation? I just switch off the light and keep tossing around. And try to focus on things that makes me feel good. And this and that. When did the light come in your house? About three days ago. Okay. What are you most proud of in your life? What am I proud of? I was among the top 2% in my MBA class. And when I used to run my business I designed a product that was working really well. And I was happy that I was able to design something that was so useful for my business. How would your best friend describe you? I'm thinking my friends would describe me as very friendly, very easy to get along with, very focused, very intelligent. And a good cook. Okay. Can you tell me who is the most positive in your life? Albert Einstein. Can you tell me about that? I mean some of his theories. You know, obviously it involves a lot of deep thinking. And the first few times I read about him, about his theories, I had difficulty in really understanding that. And that, you know, I mean when there are things that I really try to understand and I'm not able to. And I'm not able to. But, you know, they are all the type of people I admire. What advice would you give to someone who has been playing video games for 20 years? Listen to other people. What is the thing you really like about the life? It's diverse. And I like the entertainment industry. And I like the fact that there are more women than men here. What do you think about the language? There are certain areas where when the Spanish is spoken, you know, I would like for all people who come to America to be able to understand English. And be able to speak in English. So that everybody can participate. What are the things that you really like about the life? In L.A.? What are the things you like? I mean like I... Some of the things the political leaders do. Really makes me mad. Sometimes I think they are wasting their time, our time. And other countries are advancing. And, you know, these guys don't get things done. And, you know, I feel very bad about it. And sometimes it makes me angry. Do you think you can handle that? Yeah. I mean the first four years of Obama administration. I think it was wasted. Because if the... If Congress had acted together. And got things done. Then, you know, maybe we could have, you know, made it much more difficult for China to catch up with us. And, you know, the fact that China is able to do things and get things done much faster. And these people still, you know, argue. And... You know, find faults with each other. And not get things done. You know, they don't seem to realize that, you know, the clock keeps ticking. You know, they have to get things done. What kind of emotional reversal do you mean? I mean like, you know... Well... One thing that comes to my mind is, well, you know, I made a lot of money. Well, you know, once in Los Angeles. And, you know, I thought it happened during Christmas some ten years ago. And that made me very happy. Okay. What are some things that you do for your family? Good music. Good music. I mean, the... A party with friends that I like. And... And... You know, I also like cooking. And I enjoy cooking with groups, in groups. Those are things that really put me in a good mood. What would you say is something you have found in yourself? I'm very clean. I listen to people. And I empathize. I try to solve their problems. And I'm hoping they think I'm, you know, my advisors and recommendations are... Worth their time. That's great. Okay. I think I've answered everything you need to say. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thank you so much. You've been nice. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye.