I'll repeat for a bit, and then when she's done, she'll let you know. And then I'm going to give you the doorbell, and you can wait until then. Thank you. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. So I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So how are you doing today? I'm fine. This is a little bit strange, you know, talking to a virtual human. I see what you mean. Where are you from originally? I was born in L.A. I was raised out in the suburbs. I've lived all over. I've lived all over Los Angeles. I've lived in the Valley, Long Beach, and now I'm in Culver City. Awesome. What are some things you really like about L.A.? There's great food here. The weather is great most of the time. There's a lot of sunshine. It doesn't get cold. I don't have to shovel snow. There are lots of opportunities, a lot of diversity, all different sorts of people. I think that's really great. Okay. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? That is a much longer list. I would like to get out of here. The traffic. I think that's number one. I think everybody hates the traffic. And everybody's so busy all the time. It's really hard to get together with anybody. Everybody's so devoted to their jobs. And then we're sitting in traffic a lot too. Yeah. What did you study at school? I just graduated actually. I studied marine biology. Wow. That sounds interesting. How did you decide to do that? I was. I went to school. And I returned to L.A. I originally studied graphic design. And I found that kind of unfulfilling. So I took a trip for a while. Traveled around the world. And started scuba diving. And I realized that I really love marine biology. So that's how I got into it. Nice. What's your dream job? Everybody's been asking me that a lot lately since I just graduated. I think I would like to. I think maybe managing a. Managing a research. You know, I'm not. I'm not really sure. I think I would like to. Something in tropical marine ecology. Maybe like managing a preserve. Something like that. It's a hard question to answer. Do you travel a lot? I do. What are you doing about traveling? I like meeting new people. And seeing different parts of the world. I'd love to hear about one of your trips. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I traveled for eight months in Central America. And I visited a lot of different countries. I went scuba diving. Wow. What are some things that made you do that? I think intolerance. Injustice in the world. Those are probably the things that get me the most fired up. What do you do when you're annoyed? I rant to my boyfriend. Does that count? How are you at controlling your temper? I'm pretty good. It takes a lot to really get me fired up to the point where I kind of blow my top. Very few people have seen me angry to the point where I'm kind of yelling and screaming angry. I don't know. I just don't get there. I think that I'm a little bit afraid of losing my temper. So, I keep it under control. That's good. I have a lot of friends that are really angry. When was the last time you argued with someone? And what was it about? It was yesterday, actually. I argued with my boyfriend about getting a job. I was talking about taking a job somewhere. And he was being very supportive. And I really wanted him to say, no, don't go take that job for six months because I would miss you. And he was just being supportive. So, we kind of argued about that. And it was ridiculous. So, I ended up laughing. And that was the end of the fight. Aw. Thank you. That's good. What do you do to relax? Meditate, exercise, go out in nature, just unplug, get myself away from a computer, away from technology, away from people. Okay. How close are you to your family? I would say not really. I'm an only child. And it's just me and my parents. And we're very, very dissimilar. For example, I'm a pretty adventurous person. And I like learning. And my parents are very kind. And they are couch potatoes. They like to watch reality television. So, we don't have too much to talk about or things that we can really do as far as shared activities. So, you know, I love them and everything. But there's not too much common ground. I see what you mean. Do you consider yourself an introvert? Yes. I think I'm a very social introvert. But I seem to find most social encounters to be draining. Whereas my boyfriend, for example, he derives a lot of pleasure and energy from being around people. For me, it's always a little bit the opposite. I have to recharge. How are your best friends? I'm not sure I have a best friend. But I guess I'll say my boyfriend. He's kind of my default best friend. He would probably say passionate, intelligent. He always tells me that I'm really hard on myself. Which is true. Dedicated, loyal. That's great. What are you most proud of in your life? I think I'm just proud of who I am. I don't know if that's the answer that most people give. But I think that I'm really proud of who I am. I try really hard. I've done a lot of things in my life. I'm a really good person. I think it's kind of rare to find people that are kind. And I consider myself a kind person. That cares about others and wants to make the world a better place. So I'm proud of that. That's so good to hear. Have you ever served in the military? No, I have not. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Yes. How long ago were you diagnosed? I was probably about 15 at the time. So I think, what is that, 17 years ago. You were very young, weren't you? Yes. What got you into the health industry? I was cutting and one of my best friends called my parents and let them know. And at that point, they took me in for treatment. That wasn't the first time I had ever been to a therapist or a psychiatrist. But before, it was more they thought I had ADHD. So it was, I think, my parents. My parents really took me in rather than me seeking help. Do you still go to therapy now? I haven't for about three years. I stopped because it felt like I was checking in with a parole officer. I just wasn't enjoying the relationship I had. But I still have a psychiatrist that I go to for med checks. That's tough. Do you feel like there's . I do think it's useful if you have the right therapist. I think if you don't have a good relationship with your therapist, it can be incredibly harmful. I have talked to people that have had bad experiences and won't ever go back. How have you been feeling lately? Lately, I've been a little bit down. I should say a little bit more down than usual because I graduated. And my routine of go to school and do school things 24-7 has come to an end. And without the routine, it's been a little bit weird finding out what to do with my findings. And finding a way to be productive and knowing what to do with my time. It's also been a little bit depressing finding out that my intelligence and good grades in school doesn't translate to real world skills. And there aren't that many jobs for marine biologists in California. Yeah, that sounds really hard. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Almost impossible. Ever since I was a little kid, I had trouble falling asleep. And about four years ago, it became really, really bad where I just couldn't sleep through the night. I was getting about four hours of sleep. Sometimes I would wake up every hour and I would wake up in the morning just a complete wreck. So for about four years, I've been taking Trazodone so I can sleep. Okay. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Have you ever seen Fight Club? You're a virtual human, so you probably haven't seen that. But it's pretty much like that. I'm just a complete panicked, anxious wreck. I lose my ability to deal with things. I'm much more likely to lose my temper. I can't regulate my moods. I'm just really volatile. Thank you. When was the last time that happened? I don't know. Probably a few months ago. I think that I may have been on a trip, gone away for a weekend, and forgotten to take my medicine with me or something like that. And then I can't sleep. And so that's what happens. Okay. When was the last time you felt really happy? Really happy? I mean, I don't know. It's easier for me to keep track of when I feel really, really bad. Really happy? I guess I felt happy on New Year's, really happy on New Year's Eve, which was ten days ago. I was with my boyfriend and some friends, and we took a trip out to Palm Springs and Joshua Tree, and it was really nice to see them. I don't get to see them very often because I've been in school and I've been so busy. So it was a really nice reintroduction to real life. That's great. What would you say are some of your best qualities? I think that I'm kind, I'm considerate, I'm tolerant, I'm pretty open-minded, I'm aware of my faults. I just try to be nice to everybody, and I'm very curious about the world and things that I don't know about. I really like to learn. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Off the top of my head, first thing that comes to mind is diving the Blue Hole in Belize. It was really amazing. It was me and my friends. We just, you know, jumped off the boat and you come up over the edge of this limestone sinkhole, and it's really, really, really blue. And you just drop down to about 140 feet in something like two minutes. We did it pretty quick. Not everybody could do it that quick. And as you go down, you see all these stalagmites and stuff. And stalactites, and they're huge. They're larger than a human because it's this cave system. And it's really murky, and there's sharks swimming all around you. So that was pretty good. What are some things you like to do for fun? I'm trying to remember that at the moment. I haven't had much free time the last three and a half years being in school. So I guess reading, hiking. Just being able to do things. Being together with my friends. Doing relatively low-key things. Going to movies. Having dinner parties. Cooking. Playing with my cat. Okay. Is there anything you regret? Not that I can really think of. I'm sure I've made mistakes in my life. But, you know, I'm still here. So it can't be that bad. Yeah. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? I don't know. Hang in there. Hold on to your clothes because the 90s are coming back in fashion. What are some things that usually put you in a good mood? Hmm. I don't know. Cloudy weather. Beautiful sunsets. Being in being out in nature. Kind of being away from the hubbub of the city. Getting a good grade. Well, has someone been a positive influence in your life? I think my boyfriend has. He's just, especially the last year he's really inspired me. He quit drinking. He quit smoking. He's made a lot of positive changes in his life. And I know that those things aren't hard or that they're not easy to overcome. Or aren't easy, I should say. So to see someone overcome that really inspired me. That's great. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Okay. Bye. Thank you. Bye. See you later. Much, much better, nonetheless. Good night everybody. Good night everybody. Goodbye.