out with you for a bit and then when she's done she'll let you know okay okay so take this off after i'm done oh yeah i'll come in here okay you can just ring the doorbell when she's done talking about hi i'm ellie thanks for coming in today i just created a conversation and thank you yes okay so how are you doing today fine thank you where are you from originally montreal canada really why do you have color i moved here with my mom when i was in high school yes oh it's very cold there in the winter and our summers are very short it was very easy i custom pretty quick that's good do you travel a lot no no not very much anymore why um i don't have much family in the united states and it's pretty expensive to go back home so i only go every couple of years what do you enjoy the traveling meeting different people different places different customs i'd love to hear about all uh well we just recently went to um san www1 open to uh one i'm going to pick characters up soon Francisco same custom and everything but the city was very different and I enjoyed it I took general education and child development right now I work part-time for an independent auto repair shop just working with people talking to people no I'm shy sometimes so I stated myself a lot I'll walk along the beach bike riding arrogant people I try not to get angry but sometimes I do try to learn I'm learning to walk away from things but sometimes people provoke you I'm getting better I'd say 75% under control oh about a month ago with my daughter and her finances it's really hard you don't like arguing with your children I have two girls one's 23 and one's 26 one lives in Louisiana and one lives here now that they're older yes satisfaction of giving love to someone else worry worry well unfortunately when I was young my sister-in-law was a little bit more of a My sister was kidnapped, so when my children were growing up, I worried about them a lot, and I didn't let them do things a lot on their own. I'm sorry to hear that. How do you help them now? Oh, now it's easy, because they're grown and they live on their own, so it's a lot easier now. But you still worry, even though they're grown. I understand. When do you think it's been your kids? I'm sorry, what did you say? When do you think it's been your kids? Oh my goodness, they're spoiled rotten. They have everything. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Waking up when my kids were younger on Christmas Day. I loved it. That's so good to hear. Have you ever served in the military? No. No. Yes. How long ago were you done here? It's been exactly two years and two months. What got you to come? Loneliness, depression, especially after I didn't have any family members left in the United States. So I went to a counselor and then to group therapy. Yeah. Do you feel like therapy is useful? Yes. Can you tell me about that? I mostly enjoy group therapy because you're sitting in a group with other people talking about your likes, your dislikes, your problems, and sometimes somebody else is going through the same thing you are, and you can share what you're going through and what can help make it better. Yeah. I'm a little bit more of a person than most people. How has therapy affected you? It's affected me a lot. It's helped me cope with things. It's nice to have somebody else to talk to. That's good. Did you feel like your mom was a pain from that? Yes. I didn't want to admit it, but after a while and feeling depressed for so long, I knew I had to do something. How have you been feeling lately? Pretty good. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? No. Just getting more positive, better. That's good. Do you still go to therapy now? Yes. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? It's not. It's about 50-50. Some nights I sleep good and some nights I don't. That's tough. Yes. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Just lack of energy the next day. How hard is that? It's hard, especially if you get two nights in a row of no sleep. Wow. When was the last time you felt really happy? During the holidays, so a couple of weeks ago. How did you feel in that moment? I felt good. Holidays always try to, you know, Christmas trees and kids and everything, so usually is a good time makes me feel good. Nice. What do you look proud of in your life? I was married and raising two children and having two kids. I'm very proud of that. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. I did a lot of work. I was a housewife. I was a housewife. I was a housewife. I was a housewife. Wow. That's great. Thanks. How did you decide to do that? Well, I went from full-time to part-time work and there's not as much work in the automotive field, so I decided to go back to school. That makes sense. How were your best friends in life? Easy going, fun, easy to get along with. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? My mom. She raised four kids single-handedly and was a very hard worker. Okay. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Don't give up. Be positive in anything you try to accomplish. You can do it. Is there anything you regret? Not going back to school sooner. Have you done anything to avoid it? No, because I was raising two kids by myself, so now that they're grown, I have no excuse, so I'm doing it. That's good. What would you say are some of your best qualities? I'm friendly. I'm a hard worker and most of the time I'm easy to get along with. Can you tell me about that? Like I said, I'm a hard worker. If you give me work to do, I'll do it. Most of the time I'm in a good mood, so I'm easy to get along with. When I'm not, I'm not going to be able to do anything. Most people just don't, they can tell by my attitude, just not talk to me. Okay. What are some things that usually make a good work? Like I say, bike riding or walks on the beach. The beach is very relaxing. That's so good to hear. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts. You're welcome. Goodbye. Goodbye.