out with you for a bit and when she says goodbye I'm going to give you the doorbell so then when she says goodbye just ring it okay hey yes fine how are you uh Watts California but now I live in West LA yeah yeah yeah yeah I love the sunshine I love the palm trees I love that um you're 30 minutes away from everything it's a great city the traffic it's terrible I study child development yeah actually I uh teach children how to be safe in uh traffic situations awesome what's your dream job my dream job is to be a filmmaker that's what I want to do I want to die doing that job making movies how did you decide to do that well when I was uh in high school I did a lot of drama theater productions and I just loved everything about films so once I had the opportunity to actually make a film I because I wasn't getting any work as an actor. I just got hooked. I just love making film. Last time I made a film, just this last October, I made a short film. It's about three people that connect together. They're completely unrelated, but they get to a retreat where they realize that their problems are bigger than what they imagined originally. Thanks. Really mad? Really mad. I guess what makes me really mad is when my daughter acts stupid at school when she does not do her work and when she doesn't pay attention and I have to get up. I have to get phone calls home and letters home and emergency parent conferences. That's what makes me mad. Yeah. Yeah, it sucks. She's one of the smartest kids in her school. No, it's very difficult because a lot of things in yourself that you find are negative go to them. And it's like you're fighting against yourself, trying to change yourself. You know, that little person is you, you know, times 100. And it's just difficult to deal with that. But other than that, it's okay. But being a parent is never easy. The hardest thing about being a parent, I would say, is trying to give that. That little person so much life experience so that they don't make mistakes or so that they don't get hurt and you want to give it to them and you want them to just accept it right away, but then they don't. So it gets very annoying sometimes that you know what's coming and you give them the info and they don't want to take it. They want to find their own way and watch them get hurt. It's sad. And then they want to come to you and you're like, I tried to tell you, but you can't be mad at them. Because everybody learns their own way. Yeah, I guess for a while, when you think about it, when you watch them go through their struggles, it's hard to watch. But it's a necessary motion of life. Children have to learn the way they want to learn. Because once they get it, they got it. So however they get it, as a parent, you're happy they got it. That's good. Yeah. What's the best thing about being a human? All the love the children bestow upon you. It's great. They love you and all. Especially my daughter. She always wants to give me hugs. She always wants to talk to me. She always wants to be around me. She always tells me I'm doing a great job. I'm like, what does she know about a great job? She's only seven. But they have that unconditional love. And you just can't help but feel like a good person for having the children tell you. That you're a good person. So I like that. Yeah. That's so good to hear. Hmm. What do you think is going to change? Oh, my God. They're, whew. They're, you know, like Albert Einstein said it best, that our technology has exceeded our humanity. And there's so much technology out there. Kids are learning so fast. It's almost like they're already little adults. But they're missing the steps. And the steps to being a child, they miss going outside. They miss learning about things naturally rather than just going to YouTube or, you know, wherever, Facebook and getting it so fast. And they don't know what to do with all this information. And they just have to fight through all that info. And it's not organic anymore. Children growing up these days, it's not organic. It's sped up. It's pushed. And it's just so hard for them to figure out who they are in this world. So that's what's wrong. Hmm. What are you doing in your life? Me? Just breathe in and breathe out. Or I'll just walk away from the situation. Okay. When was the last time you argued with someone? What did you argue about? Argued. I argued with my fiancé a couple months ago about... Gosh, I forgot. I forgot. I don't remember. It was petty. Yeah. But it didn't last long. Because she's like me. She doesn't like to argue about stuff. We like to take care of stuff as it happens. And that's it. How do you know them? My fiancé? Yes. Well, I mean, we met when I was working at... Not a charter school, but at a recreational center. We met there and we talked. We hit it off. We didn't see each other for an entire year. And then we reconnected. And we went on a date and it was great ever since. Wow. That's great. What place do you live in? My family? We're pretty close. My brother lives in Colorado. My sister lives in Oklahoma. I have a dad that lives in a neighboring city where I am. As close as we can be with the distance. And certain choices that my family have made over the years, you know, being far away. But my immediate family, like my fiancé and my daughter, we're close. And it's great. Okay. Do you travel a lot? I don't travel enough. But I have traveled a couple of times within the last five years. I just came back from New Zealand. So that was a great experience. Yeah. What do you enjoy about traveling? I enjoy meeting new people. That's the biggest thing about traveling. I like seeing new things. I like just immersing myself in different cultures and situations. And I like just being away from it all. That's good, too. I'd love to go to New Zealand. Well, I went to New Zealand not too long ago. And I stayed there for a week. I learned about Celsius. Because, you know, here we have Fahrenheit. And that was fun. I learned how to play cricket. I learned how to get myself out of a capsized kayak. And I learned that they have a lot of lamb. Lamb is good. I like lamb. But they had a lot of lamb. Oh, and there's seafood I can't eat. But they do have really great chocolate. Chocolate is so good. And ice cream was good, too. And the people were really, really nice. It was a very special time for me to go there. It was great. And they accepted me. I love that. And, yeah, can't wait to go back. That was a great experience. Yes, it was. What would you say is the most important thing about traveling? Some of my best qualities? Some of my best qualities? Energetic. Very personable. Intelligent. Easy to get along with. I work pretty hard. And I'm very slow to getting upset about things. That's good. Have you ever said anything to your family? No. Have you ever been diagnosed with depression? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. How easy is it for you to get enough sleep? It's fairly easy. What are you like when you're down to sleep? I guess I get pretty moody. You know, I could be a little snappy at people when I don't sleep well, when I have lack of sleep. But once I get some sleep in me, I'm okay. Okay. How do you feel about being asleep? Fine. That's good. Have you ever said anything to your family that's easier to get along with? No. No. No changes, no. Okay. How would your best friend describe you? You know, he would say that I'm pretty funny. I'm lax about a lot of things. I enjoy life as much as I possibly can. Good friend to have around and always ready and eager to help. Okay. What are some things that you do that you can't do? Just waking up in the morning. That's always a great thing. I love ice cream. That's always good. I love laughing. If somebody's laughing, especially my fiancée, because she has a great laugh, then that puts me in a good mood. That's so good to hear. Hmm. Thank you. Who's someone that's been a positive influence on you? And that's what I want to do. I definitely want to get into acting and really work it and get some really good roles. So he's been a positive influence. He stayed out of trouble. He's maintained a good working relationship with people. And he's always positive and very super helpful and very encouraging. How do you know him? Oh, we went to junior high school and high school together. So he's my best friend. Wow. Yeah. That's a good one. Yes, it is. What's one of your best friends that you've known? Wow, there's so many. I had these bag of M&M's and we had went to a play. And there were two girls that were a couple of rows down that, you know, we didn't particularly care for. But, you know, that's how kids are. They just they don't know how to, you know, they say they don't like somebody. But, you know, anyway. But we got these M&M's. And while it was dark, we start throwing M&M's and hitting them in the head with M&M's. And then we came to school like three days later. We were summoned and there was a mock trial to get. So we were able to get ourselves off. Like the entire group had found us not guilty of the crime. And but then we got in trouble anyway. Because our teacher just wouldn't allow us to not get in trouble. So we had to clean up the yard for like two days. What did you think of your new friend? Oh, man, you name it. I love scuba diving. I've only done it twice. But I love it. Want to get back into it. Like traveling. I love exercising. I actually like working out now. I used to think it was a chore. But now I'm really, really getting into it. That I love watching movies. You put me in front of a good movie and I'm a happy camper. So that's about it. Hanging out with family. What do you regret? I think I regret. Hmm. You know what? I think I probably regret not going up to Will Smith when I had the chance. Can you tell me about that? Yeah. Will Smith was coming up the street and I saw him. And I got so nervous I jumped in the bushes. And I didn't meet him. My boss at the time thought it was really funny. But I just wasn't ready to meet him yet. But I think I regret meeting him. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Advice I would give myself 10 or 20 years ago. I would probably say that when my gut told me to do something, I should have just went on ahead and did it. Rather than sit and analyze it, you know, days, weeks, months later. If I feel it in my gut, I should go for it. So go with my gut more. Okay. When was the last time you felt really happy? Really happy? I had a film festival that I was putting together. And things were so intense. Things were going wrong. But then things were going right. But then once the people came and packed the house, I was really happy that we had a packed house at this film festival. So this was about a month ago. Yeah. I think I remember the first time I was at the film festival. What do you most proud of in the movie? I think right now at this point I'm most proud of putting a short film together with a minimal budget but it has amazing actors. It has a great storyline and I didn't think it could be done but it's done or close to being done. And I'm proud of that. I was able to get it done. I think I could walk away happy. Knowing that I gave it a really good shot. And I think this movie is probably going to take me and the rest of my film crew buddies to higher heights. That's great. Okay. I think I've asked everything you need to. Oh really? Mm-hmm. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Alright. Well, what was your name again? I'm Ellie. Ah, Ellie. Goodbye. Goodbye. That was awesome. Is that it? Yeah. Alright. Do you think it's enough time to send me the recording?