important. I wonder if people really like understand it, you know what I mean? Like if people do judge, yeah, bizarre. I did like the Ricky Lake show with my friend and I saw myself on TV. Oh my God. Yeah. But I was eating, I was, I was eating candy and I was going to like that. And, and then I was looking at Ricky Lake, like there must be something wrong with my eyes. Cause I was like, she was like right there. I don't know. And so I had to actually like act, you know, I'm in the audience, but I had to like pretend like I was interested in what you had to say. But I looked so, I kept looking at her like that. Like there was something wrong with my eyes. No, I just saw, I was in a doctor's office and they had it on and like, Oh God, it was funny. Cause there was these guys like winking at me on the way out, like that was celebrity. And I'm like, I didn't pay to do audience sitting there. It's like, I hated every minute of it, but we got sewing machines, free sewing machines, $200 sewing machines that day. It was, yeah. So it was worth, it was worth it. But I was so embarrassed. Yeah. Only if you get stuff, it's worth it. Otherwise they're so stupid. The shows are so, I can't believe that's why I don't watch television. It's so embarrassing. Okay. So I'm going to start up. Okay. Oh. I'm going to chat with you for a bit. Okay. And then I'm going to give you the doorbell again. So when she's done, she'll let you know. Okay. And you can let me know when you're finished. Right on. Okay. This is so weird. Oh gosh. I hope she's nice to me. I hope so. Okay. Hello. Oh God. Yes. Okay. Fine. Just tired. California. Yeah. From Hollywood. Not too much. There's not too many things I like about it. The people. It's not clean. Too much crime. Too many drugs. Makeup and hair. A little bit. Not too much. I just survive. Very difficult. Okay. I'm getting a little old to be thinking of a career. But I just want probably to get married and have a little security. That's all. Just be a wife. Again. Again. A little bit close. But everybody's. Pretty much passed away. Okay. I play Farmville on Facebook. Yeah. I'm good. I don't really have a temper. Okay. It was my ex-husband about money. Hi. He's not asking me anything. I'm talking to somebody about who knows getting goods paid. But I'm saying to my husband, I have four children right now. But this kid, I want to answer that first. in or something. The middle of me being bothpacked. It's pretty things too, struggles like talking with those. Yeah, I'm not. I just think something's happening and you're upset. Jesus Christ that's about it my mother when she was alive well she still has a positive influence but nobody really Jesus I don't know I can't really think of one right now gosh experiences oh I guess like maybe modeling that was pretty cool yeah yeah I was just kind of surreal like to see yourself in magazines and pictures and stuff I didn't understand how it could have been me but then my photographer told me he was like well someone has to do it it might as well be you so oh well and it's true so that was cool just kind of fell into it by accident yeah I've always yeah yeah I wish I did it I took it further but I couldn't really happy I don't remember I really don't yeah I don't really have a best friend but I'm sure anybody would describe me as outgoing yeah no yes yeah yeah yeah yeah I know that was 19 yeah I couldn't deal with it so I had to see a psychiatrist yeah horrified couldn't sleep um I was Panicked. Major anxiety. Yeah. Yeah. Yes. Yes, I do. It could be, if you see the right doctor. If you, yeah. It gives you the opportunity to talk to somebody. And hopefully they can give you answers. Most of them don't. They try to find the answers inside of you. Get it out of you. But it's just good to be able to talk to somebody that's kind of bias neutral. Really good. Really good. Really depressed. Extremely depressed. Yeah. Poverty. Yeah. Yeah. I'm a lot more tired. I sleep longer. And I am. I just don't have the drive, motivation that I did before. Just try to be strong. Just have to get through it. You know. Yeah. There are. Not really. I'm an open book. I don't know. Well, I would say a perfectionist, but that's not really a good quality because it can get dangerous. I'm just artistic. I'm good at a lot of things. I'm really good at a lot of things. Well, I'm a good hairdresser and makeup artist. I crochet and knit really well, make jewelry. I'm not good with computers or phones, though, electronics. Yeah. I keep a perfect house. Or, well, when I'm not depressed like this. I was a perfect wife. The perfect wife. So, yeah. But not anymore. Because I'm divorced now. But it wasn't me. It was him. So. He was on drugs. So he chose, the drugs were too much problems. Yeah, it does. It's really hard. Because it's like the drugs are his mistress. Yeah. Mm-hmm. How do you know that? How do I what? How do you know that? Who? Oh. Let's do that. Yes. No. But. But. Well, I don't really consider myself an introvert. And so everything's really important. Yes. Why should you be an introvert, and why do you care? Because I'm not going to have any self- Immerse myself in what I said. Do you do you feel that there's not that much. Self-love, at first. Maybe I might be a bit braively built here. You know, it's true. I have the packets. I can take took my… Yes. make sure that when you marry a man that you ask him if he does drugs or alcohol that's one for sure that was the only question I didn't answer ask I I didn't know there's a lot of things a lot of stuff you know I don't know just the things that I can do that my talents do you guys have a solution I doing that's it. Well, I can have my Starbucks and my Orange Gina. I drink Orange Gina every day and I smoke cigarettes unfortunately but it's always good to have those because you know I'm addicted to them and then if I can eat something really good and healthy at nighttime and well basically if I have something to do if I have a goal somewhere to go something to do like today even puts me in a good mood yeah otherwise I'd be afraid that I'd stay home and just lay in bed or perform all day I could farm for eight hours on Farmville yeah you're welcome nice to meet you so I press the button okay you're good she's good except for you know it's like the one I always can she hear me by the way the one I always kind of moves weird yeah it's kind of distracting other than yeah the one yeah she kind of made a mistake on one part