Oh, sure. Oh, there we go. And if I have to... All right, so I'm going to pull up the virtual human now, and you can let me know if you can see her okay without your face. I can see. I mean, I don't know exactly her face, but I can see that it's a woman. That's okay. You know what? We can put these on. Okay. That way you're more comfortable. All right, great. So she's going to chat with you for a bit, and then I'm going to give you the doorbell, so when she's done talking, she'll let you know, and you can ring the doorbell. Okay. Thank you. Okay. Yes. So, how are you doing today? Pretty good. A little tired. That's good. Where are you from originally? Seattle, Washington. Really? Why did you move to LA? When I was 18, my mom and dad decided we wanted to move to California, and so we moved down to Pasadena. I actually moved to Monrovia first, and I've been here ever since. That's a long time. How often do you go back to your hometown? I did about two years ago. I went up for work and look around the area. Nice. How easy was it for you to get used to living in LA? Pretty easy, actually. I do adapt. Good. What are some things you really like about LA? The warm weather, not having rain nine months of the year. Yeah. Very squeaky-ammed it is throughout the city. People, mainly. What are some things you don't like about LA? The area, how big it is, the traffic. When I first got here, the smog, that's better now. Yeah. I feel in you, it's something new. No. When I was younger, I was. But, I got out of that. that was work I did. Can you tell me about that? Sure. When my mom died and I needed work, I went for a job that was called petitioning. And you have to go in front of stores and talk to people about signing petitions. And you do that. After a while, you don't get shy about talking to anybody. Also, when I was in school, I took public speaking, and I learned that I really liked it more than I thought I would. So when I did the census job, I actually got up in front of groups of people and talked to them and showed them how to take the test, and I enjoyed it. Okay. What do you do now? Right now I'm working on getting all my licenses for selling insurance. And I'm going to start work trying to get money from people to help kids in the world. That's great. How did you decide to do that? What's your dream job? To be an artist. Really? Tell me more about that. What do you do? I've always been good with art. I like drawing, painting, et cetera. But I didn't know if I could ever make a living in it. So I never really got into it. And every time I tried, it seemed I never got anywhere. So maybe when I get like 80 or 90, maybe I'll go into ceramics or something and do that as a profession. Do you travel a lot? No, unfortunately I don't. That's okay. How close are you to your family? I'm not. My mom and dad are dead. I have no brothers or sisters. And the rest of my family have either moved away or I don't talk to them anymore, or like that. That sounds really hard. I have kind of an attitude that if I have me and friends I have, then I'm okay. Okay. What do you do for a living? Read. Watch sports when they're available. Let's see. I used to play golf. I may do that again someday, but not right now because of the cost and the time. What are some things that you do enough for? People that are rude. What do you do when you're annoyed? I usually ignore it. This morning, actually, I told a guy to stop what he was doing, and we got kind of an argument about it, and then the argument was over and it was done. How are you at controlling your hunger? Very good, because I had a very bad temper when I was a kid, and I told myself I had to control it. How do you control your hunger? When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? This morning about the guy making lots and lots of noise on purpose, and in a place that was just not the place to do it. I mean, it was a public place, but, and that was it. Just a little argument, and I'm done with the argument once I say what I say. Have you gotten into trouble? Yes. Can you give me an example of that? Not right now that I can think of. Okay. What are some things you like to do for fun? Read. If I can't travel, I travel. I don't travel long distances, but even going out to Riverside is kind of an adventure for me. What do you enjoy about traveling? Seeing things on the way and back. Talking to people, maybe. That's great. I'd love to do that on your trip. Well, a number of years ago I drove back east to Massachusetts to do work back there. On the way back, I took a Greyhound bus all the way back from Washington, D.C., all the way back to California. Into Washington first, and then down from there. And worked in Massachusetts for about six months to eight months. Enjoyed the area quite a bit, but didn't want to be there when the snow came. And enjoyed coming back on the bus. Had people next to me almost all the way, different people, and had a lot of fun. That sounds like a great situation. Yeah. How did you start in the military? Yeah, I was in the Air Force when I was 18, 1965 during the Vietnam War. Did you ever see combat? No, I was in Great Falls, Montana. How did serving in the military change you? It really didn't. Years later, I probably learned more from the fact that I got out early, and maybe I should have stayed in and stuck with it. I tended to quit things when I was younger, and so now with that and other things, I decided never to quit anything. What did you do after the military? I came down here, played pool for a number of years, finally graduated from high school, which I dropped out of when I moved. Went on to the military. Went to college. Got my bachelor's degree, NNA degree at Pasadena and Cal State LA, and started working various jobs, and that's about it. Took care of my mom. What did you do in school? Business. I was my major. I also studied things like anthropology and philosophy and history, etc. Awesome. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with PTSD? No, never. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Lately, not so good, between the fact that I sleep in my car and it's very cold, and that sometimes I do get, and with all the things going on in my life right now, I think of things. And plus I get up at 4.30 in the morning. I'm sorry to hear that. That's okay. What are you like when you don't sleep well? I'm tired. And I get a little grumpy sometimes, but not very much. I understand. How have you been feeling lately? Tired, with all the things I've had to do, and the weather, and the sleep. Have you ever said you should have been able to do better or something? No. Do you feel down? A little bit sometimes about how maybe I should have started doing all this years ago. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. How do you cope with that? I just go on. I tell myself to basically stop it, and go on doing things to improve myself. How hard is that? Not very anymore. It took me years to study that and to do that. I don't know if you call it Zen or not, but it's a little bit of a struggle. When was the last time you felt really happy? A couple months ago. I passed all my tests, Medicare Advantage. I passed every one of them for every company that sent them to me. That's great. What's your favorite thing about your life? What would you say is your next quality? I stick to everything I do now. I'm persistent. I don't let things get out of hand before I do something about it. I used to be, what's the word, I put off things. I don't do that anymore. And I treat people nicely, always, until I'm given a reason not to. And I don't talk about my bad stuff to anybody, usually. How hard is that? Not very, because the same thing. I've trained myself over the years to not talk about myself. I talk to other people, I talk about them. Okay. Is there someone that's been a positive influence in your life? Let's see. My mother. My mother. Gandhi. Bertrand Russell. Let's see. I'm not sure who else. Other people I've had, but I don't remember their names, or they were teachers, etc. Okay. Is there anyone you're impressed? Okay. Any advice you can give to people who are in a situation where they're not feeling well? Early in life, like I said, stopping everything. Not complaining things. Not that I regret very much. Have you done anything to avoid it? Yeah. I could have done better. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Probably the advice I gave myself to get off my butt and go learn, get an education, and get on with my life and do something. What are you most proud of in your life? That I've survived. Okay. Can you tell me about that? Well, I'm 65. I've been sleeping in my car for a number of years. I went from sleeping on pavement to where I got a car. While I've done that, I've improved my credit rating. I've gotten a number of jobs that I've been very happy with. I've had a lot of friends, both people that are homeless and non-homeless. And I'm in pretty good health. Whereas other people in my family have died young. So I guess that's about it. Okay. What are some things that usually put you on a good mood? Good jokes. People having a happy time. Going and having a drink with somebody on an occasional basis. Yeah. When was the last time that happened? About eight months ago was the last time I went and had a beer with someone. Cool. Yeah. How many of us have a real experience? Let's see. Probably getting within one foot of a live wild deer. Wow. Yeah. Tell me more about that. It was in Green Lake in Washington. And I was out behind our house and this wild buck deer was walking in the field. And I started motioning to it and it came within about one foot of me. And the only reason it left, my dad drove down the driveway and it made noise and the deer ran off. I was in petting distance of him. And I wasn't too sure if I should have petted him or not. But I was about to. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thank you. Goodbye. Bye. All right. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. She's pretty cool for a not. She is pretty cool. So I'm going to have you take off the headset and I'm going to stop the recording. Okay. And then.