Okay, so now I'm going to start up the virtual human who will chat with you for a bit. And then when she's done, she'll let you know. And I will put the doorbell right next to you, and you can ring it when you're done. Okay? Okay, sounds good. All right. Thank you. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist. I like to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get started. And please feel free to come to me anytime. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm okay. That's good. Where are you from originally? I'm from here originally, Los Angeles. Really? Mm-hmm. What are some things you really like about L.A.? I like the weather. And my family's here, which is why I'm here. I've moved away for a while. I like that there's a lot of, even though everyone says there's no culture in L.A., there is a lot of culture. There's theater and film and lots of museums and things like that. All different kinds of people. I like the diversity. Yeah. Mm-hmm. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? Well, I don't. I don't like that I had to move back kind of against my will. So, starting a new career. Starting over in my career. So, that's not really something. Did you move back? Well, I moved back because my dad was sick. So. How are you doing? Thank you. Thank you. So, that's why I'm here. But it also means I live with my dad and my brother who are like hoarders and ridiculous. What did you study at school? Acting. Theater. That sounds interesting. It was. Are you still doing that? Mm-hmm. Yeah. Yeah, I am. What do you do now? I'm an actor. Right now I'm doing a theater show and auditioning and taking some classes and that sort of thing. How did you decide to do that? Well, my parents are both artsy people and I grew up around it. And for a long time I was singing and then I went to study musical theater. And somewhere along the lines I realized that acting was more my bag than singing, I suppose. But I still do both. That's great. Mm-hmm. Do you consider yourself an extrovert? No, I don't. Why? I don't usually have trouble talking to people. I'm pretty friendly. I can get along with most people. People usually tell me their secrets within five minutes of meeting me, which I feel like is a mark of an extrovert. Yeah. I'm a little bit of a fan. What do you do to relax? I take a bath or read a book, go out with my friends, go to the theater. Sometimes my work is very relaxing, so sometimes just like singing a song or any of that, going for a walk. Okay. Mm-hmm. Yoga. What are some things that make you really mad? Things that make me mad? Injustice. I can be very righteously indignant, I suppose. People who don't see those things and people who have entitlement, I think. Entitlement and sense of privilege. That can make me mad. Yeah. What do you do when you're annoyed? It depends. A lot of times, I argue with my friends. I argue my case, I guess. Or I call my best friend, usually, and complain. Talk to her about it. Okay. How are you at controlling your temper? Pretty good. Pretty good. I don't have too much of a temper. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? Like a real argument or like a debate? Okay. . Yeah. If it was a real argument, it probably would be my ex-boyfriend, and we just argued about why we broke up, stupid things like that. That sounds really hard. I think I was kind of over it by then, but it was at times. Okay. When was the last time you felt really happy? Um. . The last time I felt really happy was, like, really happy. Probably hanging out with friends the other night. I had a good time. Tell me more about that. Uh. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Um, that sounds like a great situation. It is. It's nice. It's nice. How would your best friend describe you? My best friend would describe me as an open book. She often makes fun of me for, like, just telling everyone everything. Um, she would describe me as compassionate and having a strong sense of who I am. She's kind of a crazy person. I think, yeah, she also, she would describe me as not having, like, a good sense of social norms sometimes, probably. That's something that she makes fun of me for, because I do just, like, tell everyone everything and don't realize that I have, like, holes in my clothes and things like that, but nothing, nothing bad. We have a very good relationship. Hmm? Yeah, yeah, it has. Not terrible trouble, but, but yeah, it's gotten me in trouble before, sure. No, I haven't. No, but I think I had it, but I never went to a doctor, because I had a, I had a traumatic situation where somebody injured me, and I, when I looked up PTSD later, I really, I felt like I had all of the symptoms of, like, going back into situations like that. I would get panicky, and it was very, I held on to it for a really, really long time. I think, I think that I did have it, but I just, I don't know, because I never, I never saw anyone about it. Um, sometimes, yeah. Um, certain physical things with that part of my body can be a trigger, or, um, it happened in a, in an acting class, so sometimes certain teachers, if they criticize in a certain way, I start to, I start to panic, even if they're totally right, and I know they're right, and, like, it's something that someone else could tell me, and I'd be fine with it. Sometimes it'll make me a little upset or panicky, yeah. No. Well, I mean, my dad is sick, so not great, but, um, but considering, not terrible. Um, I've been having bad dreams. Uh, just, like, stress dreams, I think, having to do with my dad. Um, like, getting kidnapped or my teeth falling out. Things that, if you look them up, always say, like, there's something out of your control, which is, like, exactly what it is, so. It's not the best, but it's just dreams, at least, so. Which way? Okay. Easy. Very easy. When you don't sleep well? I am tired and maybe somewhat irritable, goofy. I get really goofy. Yeah. Okay. What would you say is something you're not following? Um, I am fairly nonjudgmental of other people. I, I stay open-minded. Uh, I can make most people laugh. I'm funny. Uh, creative. I, I, yeah, those are some of the best ones, I'd say. Okay. Okay. Do you travel a lot? Yeah. What do you enjoy about traveling? I love meeting new people and seeing new things and learning, uh, and just getting out of the routine. I like staying in hotels. Uh, I like most things about traveling. I even, I even like flying. I like all of it. I love to hear about your trip. Well, I just finished a tour a couple months ago, um, going up and down the East Coast and then across the U.S. and, uh, performing for kids all over. Wow. Yeah. And then we ended here in L.A. Are you happy you did that? Yeah. Yeah, it was great. It was a good time. Awesome. Yeah. What's one of your most memorable recordings? Um. Um. Um. Um. Um. I think we, we went to the hot springs, the naturally occurring hot springs in Colorado. And that was really nice. That was a nice way to unwind. That's good. Yeah. There's some of us that I'm not going to mention. A lot of people. I, I would say, um, I mean, my dad comes to mind, certainly. Uh, my godmother is a huge positive. She's a huge positive influence in my life as well. Uh, my best friend, my best friend from high school. I think I, uh, a few of my best friends from high school, um, and college that I've kind of grown up with and become who I am with them. Yeah. That's great. Mm-hmm. Is there anything you regret? Uh, small things. Sure. Can you give me a little bit of that? Uh. Uh. I regret the way that I dealt with a friendship that was ending once. Uh, I regret committing to certain people that I've dated. Uh, but nothing huge. I, I tend to go, well, I won't do that again. But I don't spend a lot of time, like, being upset about things I've done in the past. Okay. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Hmm. Stand up for yourself. Um. Don't date felons. Uh, I think that I, I don't have any trouble standing up for things that I believe in, but sometimes I have trouble standing up for myself. I think I, I really internalize the idea of, like, you know, women being too needy. Or, uh, or, um, I don't know, those kinds of things. And then, and so as, as an adolescent and growing up, I felt like, well, you, then you just shouldn't need anything or you're needy. And it took me a while to be able to, like, voice what I want, what I needed from other people and be okay with that. And it's still something I work on. Uh-huh. That makes sense. That makes sense. I'm glad you think so. That makes sense. What do you think that makes sense? What do you think that makes sense? What do you think that makes sense? What are you most proud of in your life? Um, that's a good question. Uh, my friends and family and, uh, my talents, I would say. Yeah. That's great. Yeah. My ability to take situations and take bad situations and continue and, um, make the best of everything. Mm-hmm. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to say. All right. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thank you. Bye. Goodbye. Goodbye. Goodbye. Bye.