I'm just answering questions. Okay. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Yes. I'm doing fine. I'm from Los Angeles, California. What are some things you really like about LA? Wow. Wonderful weather. Outdoor activities all the time. What are some things you don't really like about LA? Too crowded. Pollution. The norm. What did you study at school? I studied child communications. Are you still working on that? Recently. Recently. I just. I would say yes. What did you do now? Preschool teacher. How did you decide to do that? Well, I've always worked with children ever since I was 18 years old. So I figured doing something, helping someone, it doesn't pay well, but you're investing in the future. What's your dream job? I'm a teacher. Some job that I could get paid to be outside all day. Get paid well to be outside all day. Do you have any job opportunities? Yes. Why? I'm kind of quiet, but I also like, I probably would say borderline. I like outside activities, but I mainly kind of do activities probably by myself. So yeah, I would say I'm in general. I'm a little introvert. Slightly. What are some things that you do? Oh, wow. Just maybe a racist or disrespectful person. What do you do when you're in life? I kind of shut down and reevaluate how I am as a person, how I'm coming off to other people. I can't change anyone else's personality. But I can work on my own. How are you at controlling your own self? I'm pretty good. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it like now? I usually don't argue with people. I usually walk away. I mean, an argument doesn't settle anything. Yeah. Is there anything you regret? Wow. That's a lot of things I regret, but it's not anything that I can control. Probably the biggest regret was losing my mother. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Sorry. But your strengths are going on these days. And how are you handling us? I was happy. We had a problem yesterday, and my brother was who made me do this. Who taught me how to use the books, and now I didn't know how to do that. Oh yeah, three years ago, I listed I haven't paid five dollars or anything in my life. I love you up front. And no record in the whole time. He called me and told me And when I solved it, I'm watching. control. I would tell myself to relax and not be so hard on myself. Okay. When do you think it's going to get fixed? I think that's pretty cool. I think you should have different avenues to deal with different people. Okay. Have you ever served in the military? No, I have not. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No, I have not. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Yes. How long ago were you diagnosed? Less than a month. What got you into this job? I realized I have to evaluate myself as a person, so I can't really look to anyone else to help me unless I start with myself. Do you still go to therapy now? No, I don't. Why did you stop? I feel like as a person, as an individual, I feel like I should be able to control things myself. I feel like to go seek out help is good for someone else. It probably is very good for other people. I've worked with that population of PTSD veterans before, so I know that it helps a lot of people, but I don't feel like it's for me. How hard is it? It's not difficult at all. I've always been like a loner, someone who tries to handle my own problems and situations. How do you feel about it? A little depressed, but I think everyone has a little bit of sadness in them at some point. How do you cope with that? Day by day, day by day. I just started an exercise program, so I'm trying to look at myself for the solution. Did you think you had a problem before you found out? Always known. Ever since I was a child, things moved me differently than other kids, so I felt like I was always different. I felt like if I was going to ever understand me as a person, then I would have to work on myself. When was the last time you felt you really had to work on yourself? Today. I got to see my best friend after a long time. I mean, happiness comes and goes, but I felt happy today. That's great. How were your best friends? Wow, he would say really silly, but still, when I'm around him, I try to be happy. I try to present a situation where we're both going to be happy. No one wants to be around a depressed person. How do you know them? I'm a little bit of a person who's always been a little bit of a person. I'm a little bit of a person who's always been a little bit of a person. What would you say is your best quality? Wow. I mean, on certain days, everything could be my best quality, but I would say I'm loyal. I'm dependable. I would just say I try to be there in the moment. I'm not a person who is really flashy or into materialistic things, so I feel like I'm very grounded. What's your sister's company? Oh, my mother. By far, my sister. Can you tell me about that? My mom was a schoolteacher, which made me want to become a schoolteacher, and that's basically what I have been doing. My sister has been at her job for 40 years. So I've always had a stable influence in my life. What's your most memorable experience? Wow. I would say just sitting on a sunny, nice day talking to my mother. I would say that would bring a smile to my face immediately. How do you feel about your mother? Wonderful. Wonderful. What are some things you like to do for fun? I like to get out and play sports. I play four or five different sports, and I like to go for a walk. I like to ride my bike. I like to get out and be active. That's good. What do you learn from having such a wonderful mother? Having such a wonderful mother. I mean, I have to keep going back to that subject, because we're introduced into this life, and that's our first teacher. That's our first teacher, and it's going to be our teacher for a very long time. And I'm just very thankful. I'm very proud to have had such a wonderful woman as my mother. How do you know something that you can't do anymore? Riding my bike. Simple things. Going for a walk with my sister. Exercising. When was the last time you had a walk with your sister? Just last Sunday. That's good. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts. Well, thank you. Goodbye. Bye.