with you for a bit and when she's done she'll let you know i'll put the doorbell over here you can let me know when she's finished okay thank you hi i'm ellie thanks for coming in today i was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment i'm not a therapist so i'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you i'll ask a few questions to get started and please feel free to tell me your answers are totally confidential are you okay with this yes okay so how are you doing today um i'm okay that's good where are you from originally i was born in san bernardino california really yes where do you live um i'm staying with a sister in north hollywood what's it like for you living with them um she makes it as comfortable as possible okay what are some things you really like about la i love the weather and the entertainment and the public transportation what are some things you don't really like about the way um it's very difficult to find people in the south i'm from the south so i'm not a big fan of people from the south i have a lot of friends from the south full-time employment and some of the people aren't as friendly as people from the south because i lived in the south before um those are the only two things do you travel a lot no i don't I haven't finished, yes I am. What's your dream job? I'd like to be a recording singer. Really? Yes. What made you decide to do that? I've always loved to sing from the time that I was a child. Do you consider yourself an introvert? At times. Can you tell me about that? When I'm alone, I am extremely, I guess I would say, interminded. I have a lot of thoughts and I keep them to myself. So if I'm in that mode, then I don't really interact. I can interact with people, but I can also interact with people if I change modes. Okay. Okay, I understand. What do you do to relax? I've just started doing yoga a couple of weeks ago. Cool. And when's the last time it happened? Last week on Thursday. No, on Tuesday. Tuesday? They said, I've watched it three times, рад呢 time. Just trying to find a for yhthere? Yeah. What is being cheated on in the first place? There are people that think that people are baikers or being stealing things. Different people think that they dick with me. Or they teleport people away from the home. that would make the situation better. Um, come up with alternate plans so I won't be annoyed. Um, pretty good. Um, I may have had an argument. A few weeks ago. Um, just about timeliness. Like meeting on time and showing up on time. And it was actually last, uh, Monday. Uh, mm-hmm. No. No. Um, to just be cautious of people's intentions. Mm-hmm. And to listen really well. Because people usually tell you what their intentions are without even, um, realizing it. Yeah. How would your best friend describe you? Um, a good listener. Patient. Um, fun, loving. Generous. Um, depressed sometimes. Um, but generally a good person. That's good. Have you ever served in the military? No, I have not. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? Yes. How long ago were you diagnosed? Um, within a year and a half ago. Did you think you had a problem before you found out? Um, I just knew that I often thought about situations that, um, happened in the past and kind of blamed the situation for my future. And I'll... Have you ever heard about something? Um, certain settings. Can you tell me about that? Um, if I... Um, see certain types of individuals in certain settings, it just reminds me of when I was younger, when things happened and changed my future plans. So, I, um, try to... I used to just try to avoid those types of situations and certain types of people at that time. But now I feel like I, um, just handle things better as far as... Um, being in the similar settings with similar people. I just... I, um, handle those things better. That's good. Do you still go to therapy now? I do. Does going to therapy help you? Um, I'd like to believe that it does. What sort of changes have you noticed in your going to therapy? I don't worry as much. How has saving their life affected you? Um, it's just allowed me to know that actually speaking about the issues, um, relieves me of the tension of, um, holding them inside. So, that's how it's helped me. How hard is that? At first it was difficult just being open with my internal emotions. But now it, um, it actually is good because I know that when things are occurring, um, if I'm able to, um, communicate about them with a certain individual, it, um, relieves me of the stress of, of, uh, trying to figure out what to do. I, um, I'm able to, um, communicate about everything alone. And oftentimes, um, by speaking about the issues, it, um, allows me to come up with an alternative plan that may be better just because I'm hearing myself speak of the issue. What got you to the hospital? Um, I was diagnosed with depression. And, um, my doctor felt that I should probably see the therapist. So, I went to the doctor. And, um, I got a little bit better. Are you happy you did that? Um, I am. Okay. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? It depends. Um, if I'm really busy during the week and have a lot of things to do, I often try to plan things. And if I'm planning things, it affects my sleep. I might wake up in the middle of the night. So, sometimes I'm not able to do that. Sometimes it's easy and sometimes it isn't. Uh-huh. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Irritable, um, just very irritable. Okay. How have you been feeling lately? Um, I was feeling anxious, but now I'm calmer. Do you feel down? Um, today I don't, but I have in the past week. week because I was in the midst of searching for a stable place to live and it was just taking so long to find a stable place to live so I was becoming anxious thank you yes maybe in October when my mother first came she came to visit me in October and when she first got here we had a good time the first couple of days so I was happy to see her I hadn't seen her in over a year I'm proud that I'm able to adjust to different situations the older I've gotten the more adaptable I am in different environments in different situations and I've learned how to be more resourceful so I'm proud of that I'm sorry my dad my sister she's positive because she's finished her master's degree my mom sometime my best friend is very positive because she just started her new business two years ago and she's very enthusiastic about it so that's an inspiration okay what are some things that make you really mad um when someone lies consistently okay what would you say are some of your best qualities um I listen very very well sometimes I give good advice I'm a good friend I normally do the things that I say I'm going to do so I'm dependable I communicate well and I enjoy people's company most of the time especially if they're in good moods what do you think that um bad things being around positive people music puts me in a good mood comedy shows put me in a good mood good food puts me in a good mood when I graduated from high school it was a really trabajo really I'll never forget it it was a wonderful day I eat healthy eat healthy eat healthy I'll never just forget about you I love you I love you How did you feel in that moment? Very confident, accomplished, and I was extremely optimistic and hopeful for the future. That's so good to hear. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. You're welcome. Goodbye. Bye. Thank you.