All right. There she is. So I'll bring her back up in one sec. Okay, so now I'm going to bring her up, and she's going to ask you some questions and chat with you for a bit. And then when she's done, she'll let you know, and I'll put the doorbell back over here so you can alert me once you've said it. Okay? All right. Thank you. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people, and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get you started. And please feel free to call me if you have any questions. Your answers are totally confident. Are you okay with this? Yeah, I'm okay. Okay. So, how are you doing today? Fine. That's good. Where are you from originally? Pensacola, Florida. Really? When did you miss L.A.? I met my wife in Mississippi, and she stays out here, so. Oh. When did you miss L.A.? I moved to L.A., what, 2004? About 16 years, 12 years ago, something like that. Mm-hmm. That's a long time. How easy was it for you to get to live in L.A.? It was pretty hard. You know, different environment. I had to learn different things. Yeah. What are some things you really like about L.A.? The weather. There's a lot to do. Mm-hmm. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? Too many people. Mm-hmm. Okay. How often do you go back to your hometown? I guess whenever I can. When was the last time that happened? Two years ago. Two years ago. How close are you to your family? We're pretty close. That's so good to hear. Do you travel a lot? No, not at all. Why? I just don't really have the time and the cash. Okay. What are some things that make you really happy? Nothing. Nothing really makes me that mad anymore. Really? Yeah. How are you at controlling your temper? I'm very good at controlling my temper. That's great. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? Not really sure when was the last time. I'd say maybe, I'm not really sure, but it was just about me. you know money I read the Bible I'm not really I really don't have anyone right now really can't think I really can't tell you I don't know no no no it's pretty easy and sleepy in my behavior they got better started going to I gave my life to the Lord started going to church so I'm just trying to do the right things now because I knew that I needed to and life was just just not the way it should be a whole lot better you I'm good to hang around you know good I like to make people laugh and and I look out for people take you know I'm not just for myself but you know others and things like that how about something you did recently that you really enjoyed? I just went to Disneyland with my son for his birthday and my and my daughter I really enjoyed that that's good how close are you by your family to your parents? can you find it easy to be a parent? yes what's the best thing about being a parent? that you see someone that look just like you? and you get to raise them and and try to you know make sure they do the right things and be better than what you were what's the hardest thing about being a parent? knowing that how evil the world is and your son has to live in it how hard is that? it used to be hard but with prayer you know and faith everything's gonna be alright what's the hardest thing about being a parent? when you think it's the new kids? they're very fast tell me more about that when we were growing up things was different you know but now the world is just way worse off than what it is than what it was what's one of your most memorable experiences? hmm... hmm... flying in an airplane for the first time cool can you tell me about that? yeah I was nervous because I've never been on a plane before so how did you feel in that moment? I felt a little nervous, scared you can say I'd love to hear about one of your trips yeah this one I flew back home and I was like what's going on? you know visiting home went back for about a week or two you know seeing my family hadn't seen them in a couple years so that was pretty cool okay what did you study at school? right now college I'm taking I'm studying I want to be a culinary arts so I want to be a chef awesome! how did you decide to do that? I like cooking so I just decided to just go ahead and you know get an education on it are you happy with your life? yeah I'm happy okay what do you look proud of in your life? I'm proud that I made the decision to serve the Lord and do the right thing when was the last time you felt really happy? last night tell me more about that just because it's like I know that everything's gonna be alright and I have no more worries so I'm happy that's so good to hear what are some things that you wish that you could have given you? cooking cooking puts me in a good mood and seeing that my kids are happy that's cool is there anything you regret? no can't say I regret anything what advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? what advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? I really don't know okay okay okay I think I've asked everything I need to thanks for sharing your thoughts with me no prob bye bye bye bye I feel like someone's really asking me questions