Oh, wow. Okay. Okay. Thank you, ma'am. Yes. I'm okay. Okay. I'm from Los Angeles, California, originally. Yes. Sunshine. The weather is great. That's about it. Smog, pollution, crime, certain things like that, yeah. I did at one point in my life, I was in the military. I don't do hardly a lot of traveling no more. Yeah. See? I think it's more the people and being around different types of city and meeting different new people. I traveled to New York one time, and it was quite different. Big city, different people. That's about it. How old were you when you were 18? 18. Were you very competitive? Yes, I was. Did you do anything much? No. I did a lot of combat training, but no combat. Okay. How did you get into military training? Discipline more, more motivated. You get a lot of things done more. It's a lot of different things. Maybe when you don't want to do them, you just go back to your army days and you get motivated off the stuff that you really needed to get done, but you didn't want to do it. It got there. Like, you had to do a lot of cleaning. You had to wake up pretty early. You had to do a lot of PT. You had to stay up to like 2, 3 o'clock in the morning. You didn't wake back up until 4 or 5. You had to do a lot of things. To a certain point, yes. What did you do after the military? After the military, I joined the National Guard and I did 15, 16 years in there. What made you decide to do that? Excuse me, ma'am. I didn't quite hear that one. What made you decide to do that? What made me decide to do that? Just the motivation. Just, you know, really wanted a career. See if I could find a career from it and it helped me out a little bit, yeah. How did you find a career? Thank you. How did you find a career after the military? It wasn't that easy. I mean, I'm sorry. It was easy. It didn't bother me too much to go back to civilian life. Yeah, it didn't bother me at all. I adjusted pretty well. How did you find a career? History, basically a lot. Yeah, just basically history. Are you still working in life? No, I'm not. I'm disabled. Are you still working in life? Are you still working in life? Oh, no, it's okay. It's okay. I can heal. I can get better. Hopefully, I will. Are you still working in life? Yes, I try to keep up. Excuse me, ma'am. What did you do? I was a soldier. I guess my dream job would probably be working with others, working with young people, working with kids, seeing that they get the right and proper education that's due to them so they can be productive in the life of society as we live in today. Yeah. Excuse me. What did you do? I was a soldier. I was a soldier in the military. What do you think about the young people? You know, what I think about them, I think they should be more, more, I mean, they should participate more in what they're doing in their lives. They should ask more questions. They should be more motivated to really achieve something within their lives, to give them the confidence and the motivation they need in their lives. because a lot of them don't get it. When I see people do really, really stuff that they really shouldn't be doing, it really ekes me. I mean, it really bothers me. And when people talk to you, they give you the runaround. It's like, won't you just be straight with me instead of just giving me the runaround. Won't you just be straight up with me? That can be very frustrating. And when people do really, I'm trying to find the right words, stupid stuff. That really bothers me too. Spraying paint on the wall. Just throwing garbage anywhere. Not picking it up. Not really being hygiene. Taking care of yourself and being hygiene. You know what I mean? When I do, when I'm annoyed, I get really upset. I really start really cussing people out, to be honest with you. And it's something that's not really me. But I'm lucky. I'm learning to really let go of it a lot. Just say, hey, that's the way it is. It's like, I'm not in control. I can't control it. I only have to control the things about what I do. And really getting upset off of what other people do is not really good. It's not good for me. Oh, my timbers can be in control. I can control it pretty well. When you were a young kid, what did you do? When you were a young kid, what did you do? Uh, I don't know. I think it probably was my sister. And she's very controlling. And it's like, you have your life and I have mine. Don't tell me what to do. Yeah. How close are you to your family? We're real close. I can get along with them. We're real close. I have no problems with them. Yeah. Very good. When did you get off of work? Uh, this morning. Yeah, I wake up pretty, you know, the first thing I do when I wake up in the morning, I pray. So, when my spirit's in connection. With the, uh, the universe and the world. Uh, I feel pretty good. How do you feel about life? How do you feel about life? Uh, up and down. You know, up because I'm motivated to get out and start doing other things in life. And just not doing anything at all. And then other times where you want to get something accomplished and you can't really get it done. Because there's roadblocks in the way. But, uh, I'm learning how to, uh, overcome those roadblocks as well. What did you learn about life? Uh, well, for instance, uh, looking to go to school and I was having problems, uh, getting enrolled in school. I was talking to one of my social workers and she was willing to help me get online and, uh, to do it. So, I'm like, okay. Well, it's going to get done. Ha ha. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, can you repeat that one more time now? Uh, yes, I have. See, I had to be, uh, I say, uh, for the last couple of weeks, uh, I noticed that I go through certain situations. Like you were talking about the anger situation. It's like I don't get angry all the time. That's not me. So, sometimes when I get angry, I have to find out what's causing all this. What's, what's causing me to get angry. And I have to take, excuse me now. How hard is it? Uh, it's not hard at all. All you have to do is just take your time and reflect about everything, uh, that you have gone through. And, uh, take a good look at the situation. And, uh, and then go from there and find out what's, what's really bothering you. Okay. How do you deal with sleep apnea? It's very seldom. Uh, I suffer from PTSD. And, uh, getting that type of sleep would be, would be great. Because I have recurring nightmares, so, of an incident, so. Do you think it's a nightmare? I, I think it is. And I don't know what it's triggered by. But I think it is. And that's why I'm talking to someone or seeing someone. Because I'm a veteran at the, uh, VA about the situation now. About the PTSD basically right now. What's causing you to get angry? Excuse me now. What's causing you to get angry? Uh, a lot of nightmares. A lot of problems. A lot of anger issues. Uh, depression. Uh, I noticed all this in me. And, uh, I started, I just started to just tell myself I needed help. And that's, that's basically it. I just, you know, I just, you know, I just, something wasn't wrong with me. Something wasn't right with me. So when something's not right with me, I have to take time out to just, you know, take a good look at myself. And I ask myself, if something's right, then you, if something's not right with me, then you have to take time out to just, you know, take a good look at myself. And if something's right, then that's fine. If something's not right, then you need to take care of it. And, uh, I just start seeking help down there, yeah. Is that a problem? Someone. Yes, it is. Someone. Because I'm able to sit down and talk to the therapist. Well, I'm able to sit down and talk to the therapist and, uh, tell them my situation. And we usually will go over the problem. And, uh, I went to classes. I've been to, uh, I've been to, uh, I've been to a lot of things. Uh, uh, talking one-on-one with my own doctor. So it's helping out a little bit. Yeah. It's a good thing. Excuse me. No. No, not really. My best friend? Uh, they, he was a doctor. Uh, so, well, you don't walk into the site. You walk in the space. And you walk in, you want to, you want to be, you want to come see my baby. But, you know, why would cause an accident? Uh, well, uh, I'm already having a law degree from Soop and Against P Os At what age do you think you are an all- lawsuit drug? I think an bzw. Yeah, they see something in me they wish that they had. Excuse me now. Can you be a little bit more specific? Okay. What do you do? Books, crossword puzzles, walking. That's about it. Okay. What do you do now? I thought I did, but I don't think I do. I don't think I regret anything because this is how it is. This is the way it is for me. So I accept it and I keep moving on. Because if I regret anything in the past, then I'm wasting my time on that because it's gone. That's the past. I need to move on. I need to live in the present so I can be prepared for the future. So I can move on to the future. Yeah. What advice would you give to someone who is going through this? More education. Being more direct and more... More confidence in what I'm doing like I am today. So yeah, that's what I was lacking maybe 20 years ago. Have you had any positive experiences in your life? Yes, I have had a lot of positive people been in my life. Have you had any negative experiences? Yes, some people would... I mean, they would consistently motivate me to continue and pursue a certain goal. And I thought that was pretty good because I really don't see that a lot. And they gave me a lot of motivation to try to go up and try to do certain things. Because anything that you do, it's a choice. It's up to you. Whether or not, if you do it or not, that choice is still up to you for it to be done. What do you remember most about yourself? Excuse me, ma'am? What do you remember most about yourself? That I'm able to really be able to be self-motivated. And really be able to put my best foot forward. And be able to get a lot of things accomplished that I thought I couldn't. But it can be accomplished. If I'm willing enough to put the will to it to do it. That's great. What do you remember most about yourself? Oh, wow. Huh. Oh, really, and you know what I really enjoyed? Was sitting down with my social worker and we're talking about getting things done within my life. And school was one of them. And just being, just school was one of them. And I kind of liked that because that was the first time someone was willing to really sit down with me and work with me. Yeah, and I thought that was a great thing. So as long as you're willing to do that, I'm willing to go. I'm willing to push a mile and even be motivated to do other things besides school. And yeah, that's what gets me going. Is this going to be a great experience? Oh, it is and I love it. And this is going to be accomplished. Okay, I'm going to head off. Thank you for having me on. Thank you. Goodbye. Goodbye. Yeah, I think she's through. See, I thought she was really human. Wow. Boy, technology.