Cool. Okay. Oh, okay, right here. Oh, okay, cool. Thank you. And it'll say stop or something? Oh, okay. Oh, I did? Oh, thank you so much. Cool. Hi. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people, and I'd love to learn about you. I'll ask you a few questions to get started. And please feel free to come and have a chat. Your answers are always welcome. Are you okay with this? Yeah, I'm okay. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing great. That's good. Yeah. Where are you from originally? I am from Los Angeles. I was born in Santa Monica. Yeah. What are some things you really like about LA? I like, I don't know. There's nothing, I mean, I don't really like it here that much, but I guess I like that there's, you know, still some nature. It's not like New York, like two city, but I guess, you know, it's okay. What are some things you don't really like about LA? I don't like the traffic. I don't like how crowded it is. The crowds make me really nervous, and I don't like all the smog, pollution, all that stuff. No, I don't. I don't travel. I haven't been anywhere really, so. I studied psychology when I went to SMC. I took a psychology course. I took a psychology class. So, I was psychology major. I took an anthropology class, and I took math, but I'm not good at math. Are you still working at that? No, I currently am not at school right now. Yeah, I'm just at home. What's your dream job? My dream job would be, I would like to help other people. As long as it's something helping other people. I would like to help other people with, like, PTSD and problems and stuff. Yeah, just as long as I'm, you know, helping other people smile and, you know, relating my problems with other people. How close are you to your family? I'm close. Well, I'm really close with my grandma. My family, it's just, we're not, like, too, too close. We kind of argue a lot. Okay. Yeah. You can do this on the introvert. I'm sorry, what's an introvert? Let's come back to that later. Okay. What do you do when you're annoyed? When I'm annoyed? Well, I try to relax for a minute. I usually just try to take. Deep breaths. But it's hard. Yeah. How are you at controlling your temper? I'm not so good at it. My temper's gotten a little worse. I am not good at all at really controlling my temper. I need some help on that. Has that gotten you in trouble? No, not really. I mean, no. I guess it's not, like, as bad as, like, most people. I've never, like, been in a fight. I've never been in a fight for anything or, yeah, any of that. When was the last time you argued with someone? And what was it about? I argued with my mom and sister yesterday. It was just something stupid over, like, my sister was sitting in the front seat, and she's a kid, and it's like, I should be in the front seat, so I just asked her to sit in the back, and, of course, they start, like, yelling and arguing, and it's, like, really annoying. That sucks. Yeah, it does. It does. Yeah. Yeah. Thanks. My grandma, she's always giving me encouragement, and she's a therapist, a licensed therapist, so she's always, you know, made it really, really easy for me to have someone to talk to, and I could always go to her, so that helps. Yeah. That's great. What's one of your most memorable experiences? My most memorable experiences? Well, I had one really good experience. I went horseback riding, and that was really, really made me happy. I love horses and nature. That's the biggest thing that I love, and it just made me so happy and so relaxed, so that was a memorable experience. Awesome. How were your best times riding? Caring. Very caring. Always there to talk to. I don't judge. I never judge. I'm never cranky. I never ever get, like, angry at anybody else, just like my family, you know, but, yeah, just very nice, caring, and stuff. What are some things that put you in a good mood? Things that put me in a good mood, like music, nature. I like to cook a lot. I like to cook, you know, for my family. Talking puts me in a really good mood. I love meeting new people. Meeting new people puts me in the best mood. Okay. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? It's not easy. It's hard. Sometimes it's really hard. I don't usually sleep well, so, yeah, I have trouble falling asleep mostly. Why? I guess it's just, like, my mind will be racing. A lot of, you know, sometimes it'll be flashbacks of bad memories, just, you know, thinking too much. Are you triggered by something? I don't know. I think just stress, you know, a lot of stress every day, just everyday stress. Yeah, pretty much that's what triggers. I think it's just a lot of stress. How do you cope with them? I just try to stay positive. I try to think, like, okay, well, you know, one day things will get better. I just, I try to call somebody and talk to them if I have trouble, like my grandma. Yeah. Thanks. What are you like when you don't sleep well? When I don't sleep well? Well, I start to, like... I cry a lot and I start to get really irritable. I get really depressed. It makes me not feel well at all. I get very... It just is really, really bad if I don't get sleep. Yeah. Yeah. Thanks. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? Yes. How long ago were you diagnosed? I was diagnosed three years ago. What got you to PTSD? What? I just, I didn't really know what was going on and I realized, okay, well, they just diagnosed that and I was like, okay, well, this is the problem and I just wanted help because it just, when your mind is after you like that, like, it's just awful to have your mind taking control of you like that. Yeah. That sounds really hard. Yeah, it's hard. Did you have a problem before you found out? Yeah. I definitely always thought I had a problem. I always thought something was like really wrong. I just always like kind of nervous around people, like I never can really like look anybody in the eye because I'm just so nervous. My eyes are always kind of like racing and I would have sweats if I was in the situation that reminded me of the situation. Like I just try to avoid what reminds me and brings those flashbacks. Yeah. How have you been feeling lately? Oh, I've been feeling good. I've been getting out more every day. I'm trying to, I guess walking keeps my mind off my PTSD symptoms, so I'm trying to walk more. That helps. That's good. Thanks. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Yeah, I have depression. Yeah. Okay. Is going to therapy helping you? It helps. Yeah, it actually does help me a lot. I currently don't have one right now. I'm actually getting a new one in a few days though. Like it's kind of a mix up, but yeah, it really, really helps me. . I noticed that I've had less flashbacks and I've been more relaxed, I guess. And yeah, just, you know, trying to keep more occupied. Yeah, it helps. I'm truly One time I felt really happy, I guess, I don't know, today, because, I mean, I'm glad to be part of this. What are you most proud of in your life? Most proud of. Well, aging. um trying to think of what I'm most proud of um I think I'm most proud of like the fact that I am able to you know not be like well I mean most people I know they like deny that they have a problem and I'm proud that I can actually like you know be a person who can realize okay I have a problem and I need help but a lot of the people I know they don't take medication they're untreated and they just don't want to get any help and I'm glad to get help because I don't want to feel that way and I want to get help for the problem instead of feel that oh gosh there's a lot I regret yeah there's a lot I regret you know drug abuse you know but that's part of you know the PTSD I regret you know the drug abuse you know but that's part of you know the PTSD I regret you know the regret um a lot uh mistakes you know relationships stuff like that wow um I would have told myself to um I guess the advice I would have given myself was to try to keep my mind more relaxed I guess Yeah. What would you say is the most fun? Well, I'm a very nice person and I always like to smile. People are always saying how I smile a lot, but the smile, I guess it kind of hides what's on the inside, but I'm pretty depressed, but I just try to keep smiling and I always like to lend a hand to help and make people feel better. Okay. What are some things you like to do for fun? For fun? I like to go to the mall. That's a lot of fun. I like to go to the mall. I like to go out with my grandma. We go places, go shopping. I love shopping and I like to go play games. I like to play video games. Those are fun. Stuff like that. Nice. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Okay. Thanks. Goodbye. Goodbye. Okie dokie. I'm done. You can go take off your headband. Oh, okay. Thank you for recording. Thank you. Thank you. And then I'm going to just...