Okay. She'll say goodbye. She'll let you know when you're all through. Okay. And then I'm going to put the doorbell back over here, and you can let me know when you're done. Okay. Okay. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I've been created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing fine, thank you. That's good. Where are you from originally? Originally, I'm from, well, I was born in Mississippi, so I'm from Gulfport, Mississippi. Really? Yes. Why did you miss LA? I didn't have a choice. I was a child. I moved here with my parents. When did you miss LA? When I was two years old. You were very young, weren't you? Yes, I was. I was a toddler. Do you travel a lot? Yes, I like to travel, and I travel a lot. What do you enjoy about traveling? Being around new environments and new people, different things. What are some of your favorite trips? I love to travel on my trip. Well, one of my favorite trips was visiting Africa. In, I think, 2006, I visited West Africa, and that was a great trip for me. It was a medical mission where we volunteered and gave medical assistance to people. Wow. How did you decide to do that? A friend of mine was actually involved, and she talked to me about getting involved, so I went with her, and it went from there. So, I don't know, I made the decision that way. Cool. Are you happy you did that? I am. I am happy I did that. It's something I'll never forget. That's so good to hear. What did you study at school? I studied English and education so that I could teach high school students. Are you still working in that? Not currently, no. What do you do now? Well, right now, I tutor privately for my college. I'm working for a private tutoring company and looking to get back into the classroom working as a teacher. What's your dream job? Well, anything that combines teaching, traveling, and writing would be a dream job for me. So, yeah, anything that combines those three items. So, teaching has the closest outcome to that. Okay. Do you consider yourself an introvert? Occasionally, yes. Why? I don't know. I guess in comparison to others that are considered outgoing, and a lot of people have said I seem reserved or kind of introverted. I don't know. Okay. What do you do to relax? Hmm. Well, I don't know. I read. I just started meditation. I try to breathe and calm down. Yeah. Okay. What are some things that make you really mad? Some things that make me really mad? Um, mistreatment of children, abuse of children. I see what you mean. What do you do when you're annoyed? Um, try to figure out what's annoying me, usually, and then go from there. If I can control not being annoyed, like, ultimately, I control that, whether or not I'm annoyed. So, try to figure out what the problem is, and then go from there, and not be annoyed, if I can help it at all. Yeah. How are you at controlling your temper? Oh, I'm fine at controlling my temper. I think so. I don't have... That's good. Yeah. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? The last time I argued with someone was, um... I don't know, maybe a couple of days ago? And it was about, um... It was about a smell they had on their clothes that I thought smelled like perfume, and they said it did not. So... Yeah. That's dumb. This is cool. How close are you to your family? I think I'm very close to my family. We're a pretty close-knit family. Talk every day. Um... I see each other most every day. That's great. Who's been a positive influence in your life? There have been a lot of positive influences in my life. I would say my aunt, and definitely my mother, have all been positive influences. Tell me more about that. Well, um... I look up to my aunt. I think she's positive. I look up to her. Because obviously we grew up with very similar backgrounds, came from very similar neighborhoods and areas, and she's very successful, despite the types of things that we've gone through as children. And she doesn't let her past define her future. My mom's overcome so many obstacles as well. She has some challenges with her health, but she still tries to be optimistic, and she still tries to, you know, overcome these things and just still live her life despite them. Despite some physical barriers that she might have. So I look up to people who are able to, you know, not allow their current situation to dictate their future, because anything is possible. Yeah. That's great. Have you ever served in the military? No, I have not. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? I have. How long ago were you diagnosed? Well, I was diagnosed within the last year, and then again most recently within the last three months. What got you into the health? Well, fear and just not knowing what to do with some of the things I was feeling, and not knowing, you know, why I couldn't stop feeling the way I was feeling. Yeah. What were your symptoms? There were a lot of symptoms. You know, mostly I gained a lot of weight. I couldn't sleep a lot, and then sometimes I could sleep too much. Felt sad sometimes, like I wanted to cry a lot. Oh. Yeah. How have you been feeling lately? I've been feeling okay. There are days you have, I don't know, every day is different. So, I mean, today I feel fine, but like I said, everything is different lately. I've been feeling more like I can be involved in my own life, and like I want to get out and do more things. Yeah. Have you ever seen any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? No. No, no, no, no I haven't. Not any different from before, what I was experiencing before. Do you still go to therapy now? No. Why did you stop? Well, I was receiving, you know, I guess psychotherapy, and I was going to have a physical therapy for a couple days, because I had been doing it for a couple days, and I don't know, a lot of things happened. I moved for a while to go take care of my grandmother, and I just kind of got more involved in taking care of other people instead of myself for a while. That sounds really hard. Sometimes. Do you feel like there's a lethal? I do. Yes, it is. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? It's kind of easy. It's kind of difficult. I either have a hard time falling asleep or a hard time staying asleep. Are you triggered by sleep? Sure it is. I just don't know what it is as of yet, because I, you know, usually it's thoughts, continual thoughts running through my mind that either keep me up or make it hard for me to go asleep, or make it hard for me to stay asleep. How do you cope with them? I don't know. I don't know. I just kind of journal sometimes. That might help if I can write some things down and get it out. That helps. Other than that, I don't, you know, haven't found any really great ways of coping. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Tired. Yeah, mostly tired, kind of confused. Okay. When was the last time you felt really happy? I don't know. For the most part, I feel happy. It's just the last time I felt really happy was, I guess, over the holidays. I'd love to hear all about it. I don't know. I guess just being around family and friends, just the holiday season, I guess, in general. That was just a happy time for me. And seeing people I haven't seen in a while. That's about it. Okay. How would your best friend describe you? How would my best friend describe me? Probably as quiet sometimes, cautious, talkative sometimes, tenacious. I don't know. A lot of my friends say that they... look up to me for some of my accomplishments. And they also say that they are grateful to have me as a friend because I'm caring and compassionate or easy to talk to, that I remind them of or feel like a sister to them. That's great. Is there anything you regret? Everyone has regrets. I have regrets. I'm sure. Yeah, I guess so. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? To just relax and be yourself and just go ahead. And it sounds cliche, and I don't mean to sound that way, but it's true. It's just you have to learn how to be comfortable with you and relax and just know you. To not compare yourself to other people. Because... What? What someone else is doing or where they may be in their life at a certain time is not necessarily where you are supposed to be or what you're supposed to be doing at that time. It doesn't mean that you're less competent or less able to do it. It just means that everyone has their path and everyone has their time and their progression to how they get to things. So I would tell me 10 years ago to just believe in me and stay on my own path for what it is that I want for my life. And don't be... Yeah. Yeah. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. I really enjoyed working with... Well, okay. A science project with my younger relatives, my cousins. We did a science project together and it was fun, despite the mess we made. It was ball. Awesome. What are you most proud of in your life? Being the first to attend college in my family. And then going to college and coming back to the community where I went to school. And then teaching in that community and volunteering in that community and helping youth or children that come from the same background that I came from. So I'm most proud of being able to... Have the opportunity to improve and better myself and then to come back and help someone else improve and better themselves as well. That sounds like a great situation. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Goodbye. Goodbye. Bye. I guess I'll press this. Hi. That is really cool.