Great, thank you. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confident. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, I'm going to start with a question. How are you doing today? Okay. That's good. Where are you from originally? New York. Really? Why did you move to LA? To pursue a music industry, a job in the music industry. Are you still working in that? Yes. What do you do now? Self-employed. What's your dream job? To become a music producer. Awesome. Great. Thank you. How hard is that? It's pretty hard. There's a lot of competition. Aww. I see what you mean. Why did you move to LA? To pursue a job. When did you move to LA? When? About a year ago. Last February. How easy was it for you to get used to living in LA? It was pretty difficult. The East Coast is a lot different than the West Coast. How often do you go back to your hometown? I think I've been there twice in the past year. That's good. Do you travel a lot? No, I'm more of a creature of habit. Okay. Do you consider yourself an introvert? Yes. Why? Sometimes I feel like I don't fit into the crowd. So it's better sometimes to be more quiet and view everything instead of going in and actively pursue things. What do you do in your life? Probably listen to music and spend time with my dogs. What are some things you do in your life that you don't do? What are some things that you really like? Probably people being not very nice to me or seeing injustices. I think that's about it. How are you at controlling your temper? Pretty good. When was the last time you argued with someone? Probably a couple of days ago. One of my friends was saying that they were making a comment about how I am and I got kind of upset about that. Does it hurt? Yeah, it does. How close are you to them? Pretty close. How do you know them? My best friend. So I'm just one of my friends. What do you do when you're annoyed? I kind of am quiet about it. And when a person pushes me to a certain point, that's when I overreact usually. How hard is that? It's pretty hard. I rather the person notice that I'm kind of getting withdrawn and actively engage in me instead of getting it to the point where it's like, it comes to a point where it blows out of proportion. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Probably spending time with my family in New York. How close are you to your family? Very close. That's good. Who's someone that's been a positive influence on you? My sister and my brother. Tell me more about that. I don't know, they're just great people. And I love them a lot. And they're a lot like me, so I feel like I have people that understand me. That's good. How would your best friend describe you? Probably, I guess, loyal, sensitive. Yeah. Positive. I don't know. It's kind of hard. It's a hard question. Okay. Have you ever served in the military? No. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Yes. How long ago were you diagnosed? Gosh. I think probably 1997, so a long time ago. What got you to be a doctor? During that time, I was just going through a lot of issues and I was feeling unsafe to myself. So I ended up going to the doctor to kind of get meds and have therapy and stuff. Do you still go to therapy now? Not currently. I ended about like six months ago. Why did you stop? I just felt the therapist wasn't really there. She was helping me. I felt we kept on talking about the same things over and over and she wasn't really challenging me. And I've been in therapy for a really long time, so I just knew it was a change. Yeah. Sorry to hear that. It's okay. Do you feel like there's a need for therapy? Yes, I do actually. When I feel connected to a therapist, I feel like it's a really great way for me to talk about what I'm going through. So, yes, I do. What sort of changes have you noticed in your life? I'm better at describing my emotions and feelings. I think the biggest thing is when I'm in situations, I can see myself reacting one way and I take a step back and see how I can react normally almost in a way. Also, I tend to take a lot of my emotions and feelings and kind of bury them and make them feel like real. I feel really bad about myself. So it's nice to talk to someone that's not judging, that doesn't really tell me, like, you know, they tell me it's okay basically. What were you thinking? Feeling hopeless all the time, not having, you know, enough energy to do things I used to like, had a little bit of concentration issues. Having weird, disturbing thoughts sometimes. Just popping in my mind. And just overall just feeling kind of crummy about life. Are they triggered by something? Sometimes they are. Like random moments, if there's like a problem with like my interpersonal life or something like that. Or if I sometimes even seeing something on television, like sometimes that affects me. How do you feel about that? Listening to music or trying to distract myself. Trying, like my therapist told me, for the longest time to journal, to record things. How have you been lately? It's been a tough transition to come here. So, well, being here. So, kind of half and half, okay and not okay. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? I feel like I've been a little bit more withdrawn. Lately. But that's about it. Okay. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Some days it's great. Some days it's not. More recently it's been a little bit more difficult. Why? I don't know why. I have like a lot of thoughts on my mind at night. So I tend not to sleep very well. And I wake up quite frequently during the night. Why do you wake up? I wake up when you don't sleep well. I'm very groggy in the morning and that's about it. Like during the day I tend to yawn a lot. And my friends always are like, why are you yawning so much? Are you disinterested in what we're doing? And I'm trying to tell them it's not that at all. Okay. When was the last time you woke up? When did you have a good night's sleep? Probably Christmas time when I was with my family. How did you sleep at night? Just really happy and feeling like everything was alright in my life. Having a good sense of like where I was at that moment. Being present with myself. That's good. What would you say is something about quality? Probably, you know, let's see, that's a hard question. I think probably I can tend to read people kind of well sometimes. And I like to say I'm good at like being a good friend to people. Being a good family member. I'm a hard worker when I do have a job. So. What do you think your job is? Regrets? Sure. I mean, it's life. So, of course, there's regrets. One that comes to mind is I wish that I don't eat as much so I can be a lot more healthy. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years down the line? Don't take things so seriously. Enjoy being youthful. And I think that's it. Okay. What are you most proud of in your life? I don't know. That's a good question. Probably my previous job and my employment. I worked really well with kids. So I did a great job at that. I was a researcher. I was a teacher. I was at a hospital. And I helped a lot of kids out for about six years. So seven years. Wow. That sounds amazing. Yeah. It was awesome. How did you decide to do that? I was really inclined of like reading people. And so I decided to major in psychology. So and then I went and worked in a mental health facility. And did research. With them. With drugs and depression and things like that. So it found like a good niche for me. That's great. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Okay. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. No problem. Goodbye. Goodbye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. I個ll you next week. Bye. Bye. May曼 viноūn. Bye. Bye.