All right, cool. Thanks. Hi, I'm Ellen. I'm a student at the University of Michigan. I'm not a graduate, but I'm really learning about people, and I love learning about you. I like to do research on you. I'm a student at the University of Michigan. I'm a student at the University of Michigan. Are you a student? Yes. Okay, so how are you doing today? I'm doing pretty good. That's good. Where are you from right now? I'm from Oklahoma. Really? Mm-hmm. Yep, Oklahoma City. What do you think about the weather today? Ah, the weather is great. I love being near the ocean and the palm trees and mountains. I just love it here. How do you feel about the city that you live in? It's pretty easy. There's a few differences. It's a huge city compared to where I'm from, so traffic has definitely been an adjustment for me. Why do you live so long? I just always wanted to live in California. I hated being landlocked in Oklahoma and just wanted to get out to the West Coast, be near the ocean. What did you study in school? I studied psychology and minored in art. Are you still working in art? Yes. No, not at the moment. What do you do now? Well, actually, I think I misunderstood your question. I'm not still working on my degree, but I am working in the field of psychology. I just got hired working at a group home for teenage boys who have been in trouble with the law. What's your dream job? My dream job? Oh, I don't really know. I think I just want to help people however I can, and I'm just trying to get my job done. I just like working with people in the realm of psychology, so I think I may already have my dream job. What do you do for a living? To relax. I like to read or watch movies. I like to go to the beach and just watch the sunset or hang out with friends. What are some things that make you mad? Things that make me really mad? Probably my friends. Probably injustice towards other people. People being mistreated or abused. And people being lied to and deceived, including myself. I hate being lied to. What do you do when you're annoyed? When I'm annoyed? It depends on the situation, but I try to just count to ten and take a deep breath and not let my emotions cause me to... react in a negative way. So I just try and calm down before I say anything. How angry are you at controlling your anger? It depends, again, on the situation and who I'm angry with. Most of the time I'm pretty good at controlling it, but sometimes I think, like most people, I'll lash out at the people that I'm closest to at times, and in those moments I'm not that good at controlling it. When was the last time you argued? When was the last time I argued with someone? It was probably with my parents. I've been having some car trouble lately, and I'm also running low on money, so I'm sure, I don't even remember exactly, but I'm sure we kind of probably thought about the fact that I, you know, need to be more self-sufficient and independent, take care of my own things like car issues. What place are you closest to in Oklahoma? I am very close with my family. They're still in Oklahoma, but I talk to them on the phone all the time. Who's someone you're most comfortable talking to in Oklahoma? Oh, definitely, I mean, my mom, I think. She's probably the person that I'm closest to, and she just, she's a great role model. She's a wonderful person, and she's very hardworking and very unselfish, and I just want to be like her in those ways. What's something you've missed in the past year? Oh, probably the time I went bungee jumping over the Nile River in Uganda. I still kind of have flashbacks of that moment, just free falling, it was like the coolest experience ever, and I love doing things that are crazy like that, so it was a fun time. Have you traveled a lot? Yeah, well, I have traveled a lot. Nowadays I don't travel so much anymore, but I used to work for a cruise line, a Norwegian cruise line, so I would go travel all the time with them, and then I also did an 11-month long trip around the world, the mission trip, so I just went and helped out in different third world countries. It was really cool. What do you enjoy about traveling? I just love going to different places, seeing new places, and meeting all different types of people, because it's easy to just, like, get to know people, and you get so absorbed in your own small bubble that you forget that there's a huge world out there, and there's all different types of people with all different types of beliefs, and it's just really cool to be able to branch out and meet those types of people, and see just the diversity in the terrain of the Earth, even in the way that the Earth looks in different places is cool. Have you ever served in the military? No, I have not served in the military. Have you ever been in the military? Nope. Have you ever been diagnosed with depression? No, I've never been formally diagnosed, although I would say I probably diagnosed myself with depression. Just after having studied it a lot in psychology throughout the years, I'm probably 99% sure that I've struggled with depression off and on. How easy has it been for you to get into the military? Lately it's been pretty easy, but throughout the years, I've definitely had a lot of issues with insomnia, just either not being able to fall asleep, or just waking up constantly throughout the night. Right now, I'm not really experiencing too much of that, but in the past it's definitely been an ongoing issue for me. What do you like about sleep? I'm not a pleasant person when I don't sleep well. Sleep is extremely important for me, I think maybe more so than a lot of people. I need good sleep to function. How have you been feeling lately? I've been feeling really good. Over the past several months, I was unemployed after coming out here, and that was really, really tough. I just recently got offered my job, just like last week. I definitely think I've been going through a lot of crap, and just a lot of depression, but it's lifted, a lot of it has lifted off of me, because I don't have that pressure any longer of like, how am I going to make ends meet? This city is really expensive, and I don't have a job. So I feel much more relieved than I have been feeling, which is good. How do you understand how you've been feeling lately? Yeah, well, I mean, just like I said, over the past week or so, I've become a lot more positive. I was kind of like feeling a bit like a hermit, in a way. It's just hard being in a new city and not really knowing too many people. And of course, like I said, not having a job kind of causes you to kind of just be in your own shell, I guess. And that was kind of how it's been for me. And just since I got offered the job, I just have so much more confidence and positivity that things are starting to work out for me, which is good. When was the last time you felt really happy? Oh, it was probably a couple of days ago, actually. I went to explore part of the South Bay area that I hadn't really been to before. And I was just going to go for a jog along the beach, and it was really foggy outside. And then the fog started to lift, and it was just beautiful. And then I went for a drive up kind of off this cliff where there's beautiful scenery that I'd never seen before. And I just was overwhelmed with how pretty it was. And I was just like, oh, I can't believe that I get to live here. So that was definitely a happy moment for me. How would your best friend describe you? My best friend would probably say that I'm very daring and bold and fearless, that I'm unique and artistic. And I don't, I guess I should probably say that I'm a nonconformist. I don't really think the way that a lot of people do. And I question everything, which can be a good or a bad thing. But, yeah. What do you most find in life? Probably just like the fact that I really try to live my life with no regrets. And just I try to live a very exciting life in a way. And I think that, especially ever since I finished college and have been traveling like I have, I've tried moving all different places by myself. So I think just the fact that I'm not really afraid. I don't let things hold me back. I just, if I want something or if I want to do something, I just do it. And I guess in a way, like, I like that about myself and the fact that I'm really independent and can just go and do whatever I feel like doing. Even if it's hard, I still, I'm proud that I've overcome a lot of those struggles. What do you miss most about yourself? Oh, there's like minor things that I regret. Throughout my life. But there's not anything really major. Because I think pretty much everything that I've done, I've learned from whether it's good or bad. So I wouldn't really change anything. What advice would you give yourself when you're in a situation like this? Oh, I would say, I would tell myself when I was a kid that I should just keep dreaming big and don't let anything that anyone says, like, stop me. From believing that anything's possible. Because I guess as I've grown into an adult, I've really seen and started to really believe that truly anything is possible. And then if you really want something, you can go after it and you can get it. And so I would just tell myself to never give up and just always believe that you can do what you want to do. How about something that you can never give up? Oh, let's see. That's kind of hard. Oh, I guess I went home recently for Christmas, back to Oklahoma. And I got to see some of my friends from college that I hadn't seen in, some of them I hadn't seen in, like, since I graduated. So, which has been like four years ago. So it was really awesome just to go out with them. And we went to dinner and we went out afterwards and just had a good night. And it was really, really fun. Okay, I think I'm off. I'll be seeing you next week. Cool. Thanks for sharing. You're welcome. Bye. Bye. Yay, it worked. Okay, that was fun. So I'm going to, could she stay up and look okay?