Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? That's good. Where are you from in Pennsylvania? Really? Mm-hmm. And where's this from, then? Well, I was in Boston for a couple years, and then I moved here about three and a half years ago, but I just wasn't satisfied with the quality of my life. Uh-huh. How often do you go back to your hometown? Maybe once or twice. Last year, I only got to go back. Once. A year. Definitely safer, and definitely a more... Well, I dismissed it because I have a lot of family back there, but L.A. is okay. I mean, everyone loves the climate here. Not too easy. I have two really good friends here, and I have a boyfriend I've been with for three years, so that helps. He's from here, but it definitely took a bit of adjustment. Okay. Do you travel a lot? No. What's your study at school? Advertising communications. That sounds interesting. Are you still working on that? No, I'm currently working in... Actually, I'm not working right now at the moment. What's your dream job? I want to be a naturopathic physician. Tell me more about that. So basically, versus Western medicine, a naturopathic physician is someone who helps someone with the symptoms and doesn't just treat the symptoms, but treats them as a whole person. So they look at nutrition, they look at diet, exercise, just a variety of things to actually get someone to live a healthier life versus medications or things that are commonly prescribed now in the Western medicine. How did you decide to become a naturopath? Well, one of the great things was when I came out here to LA, I was exposed to the degree, which I had never heard of, living on the East Coast. Do you consider yourself a naturopath? Sometimes. Why? Well, I'm very particular about the people I like to surround myself with, and I don't like to socialize with a lot of people. I mean, I don't like to be around people. I tend to like small, intimate groups, and I don't tend to like to be in larger, bigger groups. Okay. What are some things that make you feel in that way? When people don't take into account other people's feelings. What do you do when you're annoyed? I usually try to go for a walk if I get very irritated. How are you irritated? I'm usually really good. It really takes a lot for me to spill over and to yell or become upset. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone? Let's see. Oh, it was with my lawyer, and it was about his handling of my case. Uh-oh. That sounds really hard. No, it's not. I'm not. Yeah, it was. He's, uh, they're, and I think they're just a little bit mediocre. They're not the best lawyers. Okay. How would your best friend describe you? I have no idea. What would you say of somebody who has followed you? I'm very trustworthy. I'm loyal. I can't bring up anybody. deeply so I like to try to help other people um and I always like to try to cheer people up so I think that's that would be some of them no yes um just a few months ago about in the last six months um I was experiencing mental issues that I never really came across before paranoia and anxiety and I knew that it wasn't um I knew that it wasn't that I couldn't overcome it by myself um a lot better I've been doing a lot of yoga and meditation um kind of seeing things from a different purview or not not purview but a different view and um that's helped but there's definitely times where I kind of sink back into thinking about the event especially because the event caused me to stop working um I think I you know I have a difficulty being in public um I'm still dealing with anxiety and paranoia about that and that something may happen so um I think I you know I have a difficulty being in public um I'm still dealing with anxiety and paranoia about that something may happen so um so a lot of times during the day is when it happens so I'm not that comfortable going out during the day I tend to go out in the mornings and evenings and um I don't like to go into places where there's only one way in and one way out um well I've been gradually trying to increase how much I'm outside um um um um um I usually just deep breathing um I do a lot of breathing exercises and I just try to say that basically what I'm thinking or what's going on with me is not real um and that I just I try I just try to get myself to go into these places more gradually a lot better since uh the last couple months but before I very much pretty much stayed home um okay How has being a therapist affected you? It's been good. It's been good to hear someone's feedback, but I feel like I've gotten more help with just my inner talk, with just kind of sitting with myself and journaling. Do you still go to therapy now? I do. Okay. Have you had a sudden change in your behavior or thoughts lately? Well, I feel more like myself, which is a huge improvement. And I am more cautious and regarded in some ways about my thoughts and about my decisions as well. I'm not so, I'm not so, oh, you know, I'll just do this and not really think of the consequences of other things that I want in my life. How easy has it been for you to get a good night's sleep? It's gotten better. I'm better now. The first three months, it was very difficult. I couldn't sleep through the night. And I woke up maybe two or three times and would be awake for a couple hours. But now I am sleeping through the night again. What are you like when you don't sleep well? I feel groggy. I feel foggy and out of it. And just low, kind of depressed. When was the last time you felt really happy? I think it's been a while. What are some things that you've noticed that have been good for you? Working. I'm a bit of a workaholic. Spending time with my family. Yeah, just being outside, enjoying nature, reading. How close are you to your family? Very close. How do you feel about your career? I mean, some of it's been a positive and some of it's been a negative. What is that? Some of it's been positive and some of it's been negative. Tell me more about that. Well, my parents, because they've always been very supporting and loving, giving me feedback about my decisions or what I'm choosing to do, but allowing me to make my own decisions, my own choices in life. And then my sisters have just always been very, you know, just always checking in with me. I'm the baby. I'm the youngest in the family. So they're always looking out for me and just checking in with me. And then my boyfriend, Shutzma, with this incident that happened, he's been very hugely supportive with just letting me kind of have my talk and work things out and understanding what I'm feeling and not wanting to go out in public. And being aware of that, that it's not so easy for me just to do something like grocery shop or run an errand without having a lot of anxiety. What are you most proud of in your life? I'm most proud of the jobs, the work that I've done, the people I've helped. You're not losing very much. Maybe that I took this job where I was assaulted at. That would be it. Going into retail, into this unsafe environment, not listening to my gut. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? What advice would I what? What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? To recklessly pursue your dreams. That there is no such thing as too late or running out of time. And to enjoy every moment of your life. Not take anything for granted. Tell me about something that you really enjoy. Let's see. Uh. Well, cooking. I really enjoy cooking. So I made some roasted vegetables. Just any time I'm cooking, I just really enjoy it. We have a garden. So we had collard greens that came up and some chilies and cauliflower. So just using, preparing that for my boyfriend and I. Awesome. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Mm-hmm. Bye-bye. Bye. Thanks. Yeah. Let's take your headset off and I'll be recording. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Bye now. Have a good afternoon.