Yes. Alright. I was born in Los Angeles, California. Well, the weather and the fact that people aren't so obtrusive like on the East Coast. Just the... the traffic and the smoggy weather. I used to. I'm unemployed now, so I rarely go anywhere. I have a BS in business with a computer option. I thought that the only place I could get a job with a business degree was in accounting or in business computer methods. So I took that. I took the business computer methods option. I'd probably be like a professional sports player or an actor. Something that you enjoy doing. I like to ride my bike. I like to watch sporting events. Now I can't afford to go to them. So I pretty much watch on TV. I like to travel, but like I said, I don't have money for that anymore. That's alright. People who are chicken heads, they get their nose in other people's business, even if they're just strangers. You expect that from a family member or a friend, but you know, especially with the internet, that feeds a lot of that now. We know what Orwell was referring to when he spoke to Big Brother in 1984. I don't do much different than I would otherwise. How long did it take you to come home from the country? I've had many temper outbursts. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone? What were you about? I kind of argued with my aunt. And it was because she was basically making leading statements, trying to trap me into saying something about a relative. And it annoyed me greatly. How close are you to your family? I'm kind of on the outs with my parents. Why? Kind of the black sheep. I understand. Who's done the most bit of positive influence in your life? Well, I mean, my mom's done the most to help me. She's done a lot, you know, more than anybody by far. Tell me more about that. Well, I mean, she's just... I remember one time when I was like 13, I went with a friend of mine to see the Crosley Stills National Young concert at the Forum. And she has seven kids. And she picked me up at the Sizzlers right across the street from the Forum at 11 o'clock at night. And I couldn't imagine, with all she had to do that day, that she agreed to do that. But she did. Wow. Yeah. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Oh, probably going down to the Cape at the end of the Baja Peninsula, the Cabo San Lucas, or photographing the Bridal Veil Falls in Yosemite. How did you feel in that moment? It was probably the two most majestic sights I've ever seen. That sounds like a great experience for me. It was, when I could afford to travel. Have you ever served in the military? No. Have you ever been diagnosed with depression? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? I was diagnosed with depression after a hospital visit in April of 2011. And I took some Lexapro, but I stopped after one day. I didn't want to do it anymore. Do you still go to therapy now? No. Why did you stop? Because I didn't feel it was helpful. I feel I was becoming a zombie. That's tough. Yeah. How have you been doing lately? I'm depressed about not having a job for over two years. I lost my job in October 2010. And except for, you know, jobs like this, which I'm fortunate to get, just, you know, daily things, focus groups like that, I haven't worked. I'm sorry to hear that. Thank you. It can be tough because I'm a good zombie, too. Especially when you're 56 years old. Yeah. Have you ever said you're a zombie? Well, it's just, it's just, I guess, a general feeling of hopelessness. How do you cope with that? I get out on my bicycle a lot. I walk or bike four hours a day. About two hours each. That's nice. Yeah. How do you get to sleep? Very easy. Because now I'm old. When I was younger, I couldn't sleep more than four or six hours a night. Why? Because I'm restless. Are you hurt by something? No. But now that I'm old, I sleep much more easily. That's good. I pray before I go to sleep. And that's when I can't have any trouble sleeping. I just pray. Recite different prayers, like the Lord's Prayer, Hail Mary, stuff like that, and I'm able to fall off to sleep. When was the last time you felt very impacted? I don't know. Probably, I can't have any specific remembrances of that. You know, it was when I had money to spend, I know that, and when I had to have a job to have money to spend. So it was probably 15 years ago. How about something that you really enjoyed? Well, I haven't really enjoyed anything. Last week I made $75 on a job with the county, basically. It was an emergency preparedness exercise they were running for their personnel, and they enlisted people to play. Basically, the relatives of people who had been in a fall bombing at the Staples Center, and we asked questions, signed up, gave them information on our missing relatives, and basically it was provided by the county, and basically went through a routine in downtown L.A. How hard is that? Not hard. It was just a routine we had. We had to follow. We had to act like we were actually missing somebody and had to give the specifics of their characteristics, height, weight, etc. Wow. How are your best friends friendly? I don't have a best friend. What would you say is your best quality? I'm very bright. I'm a perfectionist at my job. I'm a perfectionist at my job. I'd say that's about it. What was your biggest challenge when you were in the Army? I got a business degree, and I've never been a motivated person. I went to school. I went to two state colleges and two junior colleges to meet that end, so I believe that was probably the most significant contribution that I made to my, you know, to my, I guess, self-esteem, you might say. So I had something to hang on the wall. That's great. Is there anything you regret? Yeah, I regret, you know, alienating family members. What advice would you give yourself as a family member? I would have basically not been so impetuous and left jobs thinking that, you know, I could always get another one. And not, you know, basically blow off jobs. I could probably work at one of the employers that I used to work for now. They've added locations, but I've burned bridges there, so that's not possible. Mm-hmm. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thank you. Goodbye. Hasta luego. . . . . . Thank you.