I'm without your glasses, and we recommend you take them off. But if you need them to see her, you can walk out to keep them on. But we want you to see her face and everything. So if it's more comfortable for you to see her glasses. Yeah, I think from this distance, I think I better. Yeah, sure. Of course. Okay, great. And here is the doorbell. Okay. Thank you. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I'm just created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people, and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confident. Are you okay with this? Okay. So, how are you doing today? Okay. That's good. Where are you from originally? From here, from Alhambra. Alhambra. Really? What are some things you really like about L.A.? The weather is really nice, and everything is very familiar. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? Sometimes there's too much congestion on the roads, too much traffic. Yeah, I see what you mean. What did you study at school? I studied art and photography. That sounds amazing. How did you decide to do that? It was so much a decision, I just kept noticing that I was very interested in it. Cool. Are you still working in that? Yes. What do you do now? I'm a photographer. Nice. What's your dream job? Oh, I suppose running a family portrait studio or some other type of... Photography business. Okay. Do you travel a lot? No, not... No, I'm also an apartment manager. It keeps me tied down. I see. How do you like your living situation? It's fair. It's not the greatest. Because of being an apartment manager, I do have free rent, but I have to stay there a lot. Okay. That's tough. That part does. The free rent part is very good. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Oh, gosh. My most memorable experience. It's hard to say. Well, I mean, there's good and bad memorable experiences. What are some of your most memorable experiences? Oh, well, I guess some like sports success when I was in high school. There was a few things that I was happy about. And some art pieces I've made were memorable. And some bad things would be my father's death, you know. But those are very memorable and not good, though. Mm-hmm. What's been a positive influence on your life? How close are you to your family? Fairly close. Most of them live around in L.A. There's a few that are distant. My brother lives in New York. And my other brother lives in Miami. Wow. Mm-hmm. What do you think of the new kids? Oh, mostly very talented. Just more involved in technology than maybe I was or am. And they are, I think they're more of a hive mind than when I grew up. It seems like they were all hooked into social media. Yeah. Yeah. I understand. Mm-hmm. What do you do to relax? Go on a walk or watch television. Mm-hmm. Or play with my computer. And I... What do you think of the new in that? Well, there's some... There's some kind of injustices that happen, and not big deals, but for example, our parking situation got worse with some new district parking. That's kind of upsetting. And the city doesn't seem to want to make any exceptions or change some rules. And also, some unfair things at work sometimes happen that are upsetting. Can you give me an example of that? Yeah. I worked at a high school dance this last weekend. And when we arrived at the site, the people at the site said we couldn't set up all of our equipment and backdrops and things at the location where we were assigned to do it. And we had to go outside. And then... And to get an okay to go inside because being outside, we weren't prepared for, nor told in advance that we were to be outside. It delayed our set-up time. And that wouldn't have bothered me except that on Monday morning, the school called our boss and complained that we were late setting up when they told us to wait for them. And we told them we would be delayed if we wait until we still get a complaint. So that part is upsetting. And our work doesn't back us up. At the office, they just need to please the school to maintain the account. So often when something like that happens, it means they will not send you out to work at that school again, which would translate into less payroll hours for the photographers that were on that job. Oh, no. Yeah. That's how they do things. Yeah. So that is upsetting. How do you cope with that? Most of the time, I dust off my resume and start looking for other situations that might be better. That's good. Yeah. How are you at controlling your number? Pretty good. I usually... In the moment, I'm not really... In the moment, I don't really lose it, but later I might vent or something like that. But on the location, I wouldn't do that. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? Well, just today. We have a tight schedule today. I have a friend that I'm sharing a car with today, and we were arguing where to go first. Okay. And so we compromised and did most of her things and one of my things. And then after this was one of the things is over, then we're going to do some more of her things. So... That's good. Yeah. Have you ever served in the military? No. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? Post Traumatic Stress Syndrome? Is that what that is? No. Okay. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? I have not. Have you been diagnosed with PTSD? Yes. How long ago were you diagnosed? Oh, I'd say 1980. Yeah, I think, I believe it was 1980. Yeah. What got you to seek help? My father noticed some symptoms. My father is just, well, he's passed away, but he was a psychiatrist. What were your symptoms? Oh, my father had a stroke. And what did you do? Well, I wasn't sleeping. I was laying around the house. I was waking up at noon, something like that. And I didn't have a focus like for getting a job. It wasn't clear enough. I remember some job interviews that I'd go to their front door and then I wouldn't go in. And I think that was all. All positive. And that was part of depression. Yeah. Did you ever think you had a problem before you found out? Yeah. I thought I had a problem, but I didn't know what it was. Do you still go to therapy now? No. Why did you stop? Well, I went for three years and then the psychiatrist said that he thought that I was done. But, and I did get to a much better place. I have to watch all the time to see what's going on with depression. So, I think I'll have good days and bad days. What sort of changes have you noticed since you've been going to therapy? I think therapy makes you see what the, like the, I thought of it as a filter or wearing a, as if you were putting on a mask. You know, you put on a depression pair of sunglasses. You don't really, you see everything through that. So, you have to, I have to sort of try to take the, those glasses off for a little bit and double check. Am I really perceiving these things accurately? Or am I seeing it through a depressed viewpoint? And I try to look for clues about that. Mm-hmm. How do you deal with depression? I think I'm slipping back a little bit. I don't do well during unemployed periods, I've noticed in my past. And right now we have a work slowdown, so it's easy to slip back into sleeping too late or putting things off because the schedule's too wide open for me personally as a depressed person. I think that structure is really important. It gets you out of bed and you have to get somewhere on time and interact with people. Those are all beneficial things for someone who tends to be depressed. Well, I don't know if it changes a little bit. I tend to be focused on some things that are, probably not that uplifting, let's say, but it's more negative. Like I have been sort of thinking about how soldiers in the past, I don't know why, but during the Roman era or the ancient Greeks, how it would have been like to be in a front line battle with, you know, just kind of, in my opinion, crude weapons and no medical help. I don't know. I said my mind seems to go there a lot where I'm just thinking about that. And I've been looking at and reading books about that or video clips on YouTube and things like that or some other kind of like terrible doom type things like I was watching on the animal show, like crocodile attacks and things like that, where I probably shouldn't dwell so much on that. But I do think that that's, you know, I think I regret not finishing college. I think I had a, I think I was going into depression right then and wasn't coping in my senior year very well and didn't really, I didn't get out of college with a degree, although I was there seven years. But, so that's very, that's a big regret that I have. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? I think it would have been to, at certain points I probably should have sought therapy and also probably some outside help just with getting through finals, just the logistics. I was an art major and I had no car, so a lot of the art projects and things were difficult. It was difficult to move back and forth and also to meet at away locations. I think it probably would have been worth it to do whatever it took to get a car at that time. What would you say to someone you've asked to follow you? Well, I've been told I'm very patient. And also I have some original, original, you know, artistic ideas. So those are, those are good qualities. I'm very loyal and also, you know, I support my friends. I'm fairly generous with them. So, yeah. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Let's see. I think I have a couple of things. I really enjoyed was I had a nice experience just photographing a soccer game recently. I really enjoyed that. I love listening to people talk. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Okay. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. It's my pleasure. Thank you. Goodbye. To be continued. Yeah. That's very interesting. So I'm going to go ahead and stop recording, and then if you want to move on back to the other computer.