Okay. Hmm. Yes. I didn't get much sleep last night and it's cold and I'm just going to get through the day. I haven't even, haven't showered. In two days. I need to just change my clothes and get a haircut and get myself together. Get more awake. Huh? Okay. I know. New Jersey. This was 30 years ago. My cousin went out here and said, I might as well go. Nothing happening here in Jersey City. Yeah. I'm not going to come out. That was in 19. How easy is it for you to get used to living in LA? Very easy. Very easy. Just like, you know, you find your 9 to 5 job to pay the rent and a lot of things to do here. What are some things you really like about LA? Probably the film industry and the celebrities and the glamour and excitement. Yeah. I fit in real good. Yeah. I've been in a lot of places. What are some things you don't really like about LA? Hmm. Hmm. That's a ... wow. What ... oh, you know, just like the, probably the homeless problem. You've got to see the derelicts and they eat out of the garbage and, you know, we're the homeless capital of America. And you've got to see this all over the place. Yeah. I see what you mean. What did you study at school? I just graduated high school. I went to college and she was my old friend. But I have an interest in writing. I have an interest in reading and words and creating stories and being imaginative. I haven't written anything in a while. That's my drug. I don't drink or smoke or do any kind of drugs. Writing was always what got me high. But I haven't been inspired. I recently just met a young girl who's a stand-up. Her routine is so interesting, I could write a novel of her routine. Actually, Facebook. She told us all this stuff about how she's friends with a homeless woman and a homeless woman can inherit $4 million if she gets off the street. And she has an autistic sister who's very strange but is crazy about guys. And she's like 20 and wants to be a comic. And she's really talented. I've been Facebooking her, but she hasn't responded. Probably, yes, yes. Why? What does introvert mean? Yeah, well, do I keep everything inside of me? Probably. Yeah. And then, yeah. I'm always thinking probably all the time. Yeah. Thinking about my problems and just too much analyzing. Yeah. What are some things that you do really not? Probably lazy people. People just living off the government and, you know, going to get their Section 8. They just don't go out and just work and fend for themselves and, you know, take care of themselves. Maybe mad people. Just people. People who are just so lazy. And some that go, they walk around, they're in the traffic with their signs, give me money, please help me. Please help me. Help yourself. Help me. Help me. That's what makes me mad. Mm-hmm. What do you do when you're annoyed? I just try to just deal with it and try to just, because I don't like being annoyed or angry. I don't really curse that much. I try to just stay calm and intelligent. So I just try to deal with it and suppress it and work through it. How are you at controlling your hunger? I'm okay. But lately, I have had outbursts and I regret it only probably due to lack of sleep or just tension that's rising and problems going on. But I don't, I try to just stay calm. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? I don't know. Oh, oh wow. I don't like to argue, but there was, I was arguing with a girl who was working at a movie theater and she was giving people wrong directions on which line to stand on or to, and she was, she was causing like hassles and I was saying, you know, they have to stand over here and don't send them over there. They won't get into the, to the film screening. And there was some arguing going on. And I was, of course I was in the right. She was giving wrong information. This was at Grauman's Chinese Theater. Okay. How close are you to your family? Well, I do have a twin brother that I live with, but we don't get along with total opposites. I have a sister I haven't seen or talked to probably in 18 years. I have a younger brother. Don't see him much. And what's sad, just have a mother who's still around. She's like, she's not a mother.ồng 75 probably in the last three years is no communication, no phone calls, no Facebook and just just separate it. It's like we don't interest each other. Mr way that she's always and well never had a father. The father left when I was four. And She's always been a housewife. You know, I do love her, but we don't have a relationship anymore. Yeah. I understand. Mm-hmm. Who's been a positive influence in your life? Who's been a positive influence? Hmm. Probably good writers. Probably some of my favorite authors who inspire me to write better. Who's that? I don't know. Oh, I like the writer, like William Goldman. He's a very good writer. He wrote Marathon Man, and he writes about how to write screenplays, and he wrote The Princess Bride. He's been an inspiration. Nice. Yeah. Mm-hmm. When do you think it's been your kids? What was that? When do you think it's been your kids? Today's kids? Mm-hmm. Oh. Just, oh, I can answer that with, you know, I don't know. Three words. Well, two aspects. There's just too much video games, too much technology, too much skateboarding, and that would've been just in the 70s when I grew up. We went locked in rooms and sitting in front of screens for hours and hours and hours, so. Everyone, yeah... This is 2013. Everyone's just trying to, you know, life is hard for everybody, and everyone's just trying to get through it. It's tough. Mm-hmm? How would your best friend describe you? Generous and funny and fun to be with and just an all-around great guy. Have you ever served in the military? No. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Yes. How long ago were you diagnosed? Probably six years ago. What got you to do health? I probably went to a free clinic. Things were bad. I was probably interested in medication, and then when they offered it to me, I decided not to deal with it. I don't want to take medication or anything. I was taking Lipitor for a while. I had high cholesterol and getting too much side effects, fatigue and sleeplessness and dizziness. I won't take medication. Did you think you had a problem before you found out? Because I'm a creative person, I've just suffered depression probably all my life. I have my highs and my lows. Oh, man. Just feeling blah, just walking around and just not feeling anything. Not feeling good about anything or excited about anything. Just bored, so bored all the time. How have you been feeling lately? Lately, probably I've never felt so bad in my entire life. Probably the last few years have just been really bad. I'm in survival mode. That's about it. It's pretty bad. Have you ever seen yourself in a new way of responding to things? It changes. I've just become a boring person. I go to all these free events all the time trying to save money. I'm out every night. I rarely have a home. I'm out all the time. Going to events, having a good time then, but it's like I'm just trying to shut out life. I live in movie theaters just trying to just block everything out. That's not good. Do you still go to therapy now? No. Why don't you stop? I wasn't really into therapy. He was a Korean guy. He said, yeah, you have depression. You have some depression. I may be bipolar, but I'll deal with it. Okay. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Believe it or not, if it's just dark and quiet, I'll sleep pretty good, eight to ten hours. Sometimes. Because I snore, sometimes I'm not allowed to sleep. Sometimes I get kicked out of the apartment. It's a small apartment. I've slept on alleyways. I've slept in doorways just to experience it. I'm not homeless. That's when I can't sleep. That's when I get two or three hours. So, there's your answer. Inside, I can sleep okay. Because I'm always fatigued. I'm very tired and I'm a heavy snorer. I snore like a chainsaw. They have it. What are you like when you don't sleep well? I'm okay. People can tell. I'm just drowsy and probably irritable and just want to let darkness come and let me just get at least four, five, six, some sleep at all, please. If I get some, then I'll be okay. Okay. When was the last time you felt really happy? Okay. I was like that. I had a gambling addiction. I was trying to mess my whole life up. You lose it. You know, pretty much lost everything. When was the last time I was happy? I probably took $60 to a casino. Turned it into $1,200. So, I had $1,200 in my pocket. Oh, I turned 60. Well, that's a pretty, it was exciting. But, of course, the next few days, I was like, oh, I'm going to be rich. I'm going to be rich. So, $1,200 was liquidated. It went because I was just stupid and got greedy. But that's when I'm happiest, probably. Go to a casino and win or just stay even and not lose anything. That's where my adrenaline is. Has that gotten you in trouble? Yes, it has. It got me. It put me where I am today. Too much blackjack. It's bad. But, otherwise, in the past three years, I haven't had that much. I don't get it. And I don't, you know, I don't, I don't gamble that much. I don't gamble. The gambling's not worth it. But in the end, you lose everything. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Policy accepted. I am generous. I'm, you know, a nice guy. I'm not going to do you wrong. And I'm very reliable. All-around good guy. I'll help you out. I'll lend you a few dollars. I think I'm alright. You didn't regret it? No, nothing at all. I just hope, I just hope, you know, that there is a second chapter in my life at my age. Right now I'm just floundering, killing time. Probably, probably been four years now just of nothingness. What advice would you give yourself ten or twenty years ago? Say that again. What advice would you give yourself ten or twenty years ago? Manage your money better. You know, I would never think I would have six figures in the bank, but I did. But a lot of it, it just, it evaporated. It evaporated very slowly. You know, so that advice is, you know, probably just don't, don't gamble. Just keep your money, you know. Try to find some other means of excitement. But for me, being at that blackjack table with big wages was my reality. That reality was better than being outside the casino. My reality was right there. Now Texas Hold'em I did okay. You know, I didn't lose much. I'm a pretty good player. I did have blackjack. I did have a lot of money. I've got a lot of money. It just took everything. Mm-hmm. What do you most proud of in your life? Ah, okay. That I had those twelve years. Twelve, I owned a casting company for twelve years and provided people for movies and television shows and a lot of audience work. So I made a lot of money for twelve years and traveled. Had the time of my life. So at least on my deathbed, I can say from, you know, the first ten or twenty years, 96 to 2008 I had 12 years that I never thought I would have ever have money money I've been done and I really enjoyed my excitement is going is getting into a big movie premiere at the Gromit you know you know you're free and I get you the popcorn and soda and you see the stars that's about as exciting as it's gonna get right now all right take care you you