Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people and I'm here to learn about people and I'd love to learn about you. I'll ask you some questions before I start. And please feel free to talk to me. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing good and yourself? Where are you from originally? Englewood. What are some things you really like about LA? The scenery, the places to eat. I just love LA. What are some things you don't really like about LA? The traffic, the public transit. That's about it. Do you travel a lot? Yes. What do you enjoy about traveling? Getting to new places and seeing new sights. What did you study at school? I studied nursing and office administration. What did you study at school? I studied nursing and office administration. How did you decide to do that? Well, I have a care for people in the nursing field and office administration. I've always been into computers and wanted to learn more about the software and things and how to fix them and things like that. Are you still working in that? Not currently, but I want to work in that in the future. What do you do now? I was working at a retail store. What did you do now? I was working at a retail store. But now I'm just, I'm job searching again. What's your dream job? My dream job is actually at Metro in public transit to help improve the public transportation system in LA. Do you consider yourself a member? Yeah. What do you do to relax? I watch TV. Mostly listening to music, like smooth jazz, like relax. relaxing music. What do you do when you're annoyed? I breathe, I listen to music, I try to do whatever I can to calm down. What are some things that make you really mad? The things that really make me mad is when I'm disrespected, sort of, per se. When things, like when bad things happen, that's what really irritates me, that's all. How are you at controlling your temper? I'm good as far as I think I am, but there's times where I feel like I can't, but I try as hard as I can to control it. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? I argued with my fiance about a couple weeks ago about some financial issues, but that was it. Have you ever said, Have you served in the military? No, I have not. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No, I have not. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No, I have not. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Fairly easy most of the time, but if there are, like, noises around me, then it gets a little harder. Like a neighbor partying or loud noises in the house, then it's hard, but usually it's easy. What are you like when you don't sleep well? I'm just like really tired in the morning, like I don't have an attitude or anything, but I'm just like tired in the morning. Like I need more sleep when I wake up. How have you been feeling lately? I've been feeling okay, just I'm down sometimes. I sleep a little, then I sleep more than I'm used to, but I've been okay. Have you ever said that you need dinner, but you're here exhausted? No. How would your best friend describe you? They describe me as fun, loving, carefree, a caring individual, a caring person. Is there anything you regret? No, not really. I mean, I've had some bad experiences, but for the most part, I don't regret anything. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? To just do what I have to do, strive really hard, take care of my business, and that's about it. When was the last time you felt really happy? I felt really happy on Christmas when I got engaged. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. I enjoyed going to Nevada to celebrate my birthday. I enjoyed spending time with my family and my friends. How close are you to your family? Fairly close. There were some things that brought us apart, but we're trying to get close again. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? My grandmother. She's really let me see the light. She's really let me see the good in myself. She's really let me see that I'm a positive individual and that I can accomplish anything I put my mind to. What are you most proud of in your life? I'm proud of my accomplishments. I'm proud that no matter what people said about me or thought about me, that I was able to accomplish things in my life without doing the negative things that people thought I was going to do. What would you say are some of your best qualities? My best qualities are that I'm very efficient. I'm a good listener, a good thinker, a good speaker. I can overcome anything. I've overcome a lot of situations and I feel like I'm a good person. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. You're welcome. Goodbye. Goodbye. Bye.