Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing great. How about you? Where are you from originally? Born in the US. I was born in Orlando, Florida. Why'd you move to LA? My parents. My dad had a lot of friends in Los Angeles, so we decided to move here. Okay. How easy was it for you to get used to living in LA? It was pretty different. I mean, the place I was before was very, it was a very small town. You probably won't even notice it on the map. So it was a big learning experience because, you know, the schools were a lot larger and different cultures and ethnicities. So it was a unique experience. How often do you go back to your hometown? Last time I've been back was probably about five years ago. How does it compare to LA? Definitely different. My aunt, she lives in, again, she lives in a small town. So if you want to go to a movie theater, you have to drive out at least an hour. Or if you want to go to a mall, it's an hour drive. So it's complete opposite of Los Angeles. What are some things you really like about LA? The convenience. Everything I could possibly want is here. The weather is great. Shopping. A lot of friends here. Sports. LA is just kind of like the perfect area, you know. You know, I want to live here kind of for the rest of my life, actually. What are some things you don't really like about LA? The big thing would probably be traffic. I mean, wherever you go, there's going to be traffic, whether you're on the 405 or the 101. It's just traffic. It can kill like two hours in your day, which is huge. Do you travel a lot? Yeah, quite a bit. For personal and for business, I travel. Usually overseas or domestically, I travel. And I enjoy it a lot. What do you enjoy about traveling? Seeing different places, different areas, meeting new people. Eating different kinds of food. Being able to sightsee and tour if I have a day or two free. It's just experiencing, having new experiences just enriches my life. What did you study at school? Computers. And I also did English as well. Are you still working in that? Yes, I am. What do you do now? I work in IT. In an IT department at a semiconductor company. What's your dream job? Probably working for Apple. Since I pretty much own everything they have. It would be great to work for Apple. Do you consider yourself an introvert? It depends. There are times when it's good to be alone. But for the most part, I consider myself an outgoing social person. What are some things that make you really mad? Nothing too much. I guess if you kind of make a promise and you break it several times. I might get a little bit annoyed. But I don't think I would get really mad. What do you do when you're annoyed? Good question. I'd probably say I tend to eat a little bit more. Just kind of keep my mind off of it a little bit. But usually it doesn't last that long. I tend to eat out a little bit more. More kind of like maybe junk food or something. How are you at controlling your temper? I think I'm pretty good. I rarely get mad. And if I do, it doesn't really last that long. So I think I'm pretty good at controlling my temper. Again, I really don't get angry. So it's not really an issue for me. When was the last time you argued with someone? And what was it about? I'd say during the elections. We were talking about President Obama and Mitt Romney and who would be the best fit for the next presidency. That kind of got a little bit heated. But it was more for fun's sake than anything else. But it was an interesting conversation. What do you do to relax? I like to eat out a lot. Watch movies. Play video games. Just go out, shop. Play sports. Watch a Laker game if I can. In person would probably be the best. Bowling, photography. I like to do a lot of different things. And of course electronics. How would your best friend describe you? I'd say outgoing, loyal, intelligent, funny, and a great listener. Have you ever served in the military? No, I have not. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? For most nights it's pretty easy. Just have to avoid drinking coffee or tea before I sleep. Other than that it's pretty easy. What are you like when you don't sleep well? I'd say a little bit sluggish, tired. Kind of reaction times a little bit slower. Aside from that, nothing too glaring or anything. Just the usual. Just being sluggish and not moving as quickly as I should. How have you been feeling lately? Pretty good. I have no complaints. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? No. Pretty much the same. When was the last time you felt really happy? I guess today. I had my car maintenance today and it didn't cost me anything. So that's great. And I thought it was going to cost me something extra on the side. But the service advisor waived it. So I got everything free today. So actually I'm in a really good mood. Is there anything you regret? No. Nothing. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Probably don't spend as much. Save more money. Aside from that, nothing else. Just be kind of more wise with your money. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? I'd probably say my best friend. He's kind of helped me out and I helped him out as well. So it's been kind of a great learning experience developing our friendship. And he's bailed me out a couple of times. I've bailed him out as well. So it's a mutual thing we do with each other. And it's a great way to bond as well. What's one of your best memorable experiences? I'd say probably going back to Korea to visit my relatives. They're a lot more different than I remember 15 years ago when I was a kid. I was actually kind of afraid of some of them. But now that I see them recently, they've actually mellowed a lot. And they're actually pretty fun to talk to. It was kind of a learning experience for me because they're the complete 180 from when I was a kid. What are you most proud of in your life? I'd say... I guess work would be part of it. Buying the car for my mom. I bought the car that I wanted. It took a couple years to save up to buy the car. But I paid it all off. So I don't have any more car payments. So that's great too. And being able to help my family out as well. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Let's see. A couple weeks ago I went to Las Vegas for CES. Which is great if you're into gadgets and electronics. You get to see all the goodies coming out this year. So that was pretty interesting to see. And some things that when you read on blogs they didn't talk about. So you get to see it actually in person. Kind of experience it from a user standpoint. So I thought it was great. And it's just fun. It's kind of like being a kid in a candy store. You get to play with different gadgets. So it was really fun for me. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Goodbye.