This is weird. Thank you. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes. So, how are you doing today? Good. Where are you from originally? From California. Okay. What are some things you really like about LA? I like the arts and entertainment. I like the, you have a lot of freedom to work in a lot of different fields. I like the fact that the weather is great. I like the fact that all my roots are here, all my family is here. What are some things you don't really like about LA? I don't like how hard it is to get here. I don't like how hard it is to get places anymore. It's very hard. There's so much traffic. It takes a long time to get where you're going. It's expensive. It's a lot more expensive than it used to be. Do you travel a lot? Not anymore. What did you study at school? I studied journalism, English, music, and special effects makeup. Are you still working in that? I am. What do you do now? Now I am managing a doggy daycare facility. Okay. What's your dream job? My dream job is to own my own company again, probably working with animals. Do you consider yourself an introvert? No. What do you do to relax? I'm an artist. I draw. I paint. I do tattoos. I work a lot with animals. I like outdoor activities. Biking. Hiking. What are some things that make you really mad? People that aren't fair. People that are angry. And people that are dishonest. What do you do when you're annoyed? Usually I will give myself a 10 second time out and think about it before I speak or react. How are you at controlling your temper? I'm very good at controlling my temper. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? I'm very close to my children and my father. Tell me about your kids. I have two boys. I have an older boy who is 22. His name is Alexander. I have a younger son who is 20. He's a little bit older than me. His name is Jonathan. I'm very proud of him. Do you find it easy to be a parent? No, it's never easy. It's the hardest job in the world but it's the best. What's the hardest thing about being a parent? Just wanting to prevent your children from making the mistakes you've had but you realize that they have to do that just to learn how to live life. That's one of the hardest things, letting them make their own mistakes. What do you do when you're angry? I try to help them. What's the best thing about being a parent? The unconditional love my boys have for me. Being a parent has made me a better person. It's made me a better everything. A better employee. I think having my children made me a much better person every day. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Probably, I have a lot. I've had a very full life. It would be really hard to say, to narrow that down, I've had so many. How would your best friend describe you? I'm a good friend. I'm a true friend. I'm honest. I'm real. I'm dependable. And I don't play games. I'm no drama. Have you ever served in the military? Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? Yes, I have. How long ago were you diagnosed? In February of 2011. What got you to be helped? I was attacked by a stalker and almost killed in November of 2009. He broke into my apartment and laid in wait for me. He attacked me when I came in the door and tried to kill me. Do you still go to therapy now? I do. Do you feel like therapy is useful? I think therapy has helped me tremendously. I don't think I'd be able to hold a job and be responsible and be a productive member of society without therapy. What sort of changes have you noticed in your going to therapy? I'm able to handle things better. I don't get so emotionally upset. I'm a lot more rational. I try to stay more rational than emotional. More rational and logical. How have you been feeling lately? So-so. I've been sick and I've been run down, a little stressed out. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? I have, yes. I have. How do you cope with that? I use the resources that I've learned and I reach out to other people. I try not to isolate. I try to use the tools that have been given to me in therapy. I don't use medication anymore, so it's mainly just proactive treatment where I have to do something about it. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? It's not. It's never easy. It's always bad. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Tired, lethargic. It's hard to keep my thoughts in order. It's hard just to do the basics during the day. Are you triggered by something? No. When was the last time you felt really happy? I can't remember. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Oh, I went to the beach with my oldest son and his best friend and we rode three wheel bikes and that was a lot of fun. What are you most proud of in your life? It's hard to say right now. I haven't decided. I'm very proud of my children. I would say that's probably it. They're really good boys. Is there anything you regret? I have too many regrets right now. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? To finish school, to stay focused, to not let myself get distracted, to focus more on long term goals than short term goals. Who's some of the positive influence on you? My father. What would you say are some of your best qualities? I'm very honest. I'm very calm. I don't get angry easily. It takes a lot to provoke me. I'm reliable. If I say I'm going to do something, I do it. And I'm basically, what you see is what you get. I don't pull any punches with people. What are some things that usually put you in a good mood? Anything to do with animals. I love animals. I always smile around animals. Any kind, big, small. I like older people, elderly people. I like to help them and be around them. I like children. What's your favorite thing about your life? I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Goodbye. All finished. Can I take this set off? Here you go. Thank you. Talk to you soon. That was interesting. I've never done that. Sorry, that thing was getting far away. It's weird.