Okay. So I'm going to pull her up and then again she's going to ask you some questions and then she'll let you know when she's finished. Okay. Something seems to not be recording here so just give me one second. Sorry about that. No, that's okay. Try that one more time. So if you just want to give me one second I'll be right back. Okay. I'm so sorry. That's okay. Use your hair. Okay. Okay. I know. Okay. Yeah. Of course. Okay. So we'll just keep going. So I'm going to do something for our purposes. This is after I start. Okay. And I'm going to put the... It's kind of spooky. All right. So whenever she's done she'll let you know and then you can press this button. Okay. Hi. I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So how are you doing today? Good. How are you? I'm great. Thanks. I'm going to go to the bathroom. Where are you from originally? I am from Los Angeles. Really? Yes. What are some things you really like about LA? It's the center of everything. You can get to all the places you need to go to without having to drive very far. I like being in the city. Okay. What are some things you don't really like about LA? Well, being in LA also you're dealing with traffic, a lot of congestion, and obviously the environment as far as the air quality is not that great. But, you know, you live with that. I see what you mean. What did you study at school? I was a business administration major so I studied business. And after I finished college I pursued a career in retail operations. Are you still doing that? No. As a matter of fact, I am not. I kind of changed career over the last four or five years. So I'm concentrating more on the human resources side of the business. What made you decide to do that? A couple of factors. After working numerous years in the retail business, I switched over and worked in a creative business, which was a graphic design firm. And I captured a lot of knowledge in the human resources side because I was the operations manager slash benefits manager for a small company. Are you happy you did that? Yes. I'm very happy I did that. Okay. I picked up a lot of knowledge and it's very helpful. That's great. I love my job. You could almost say it's virtually made for me. What's your dream job? Well, my dream job is I'm basically kind of doing what I want to do now because I am an independent contractor. I do freelance work as an HR consultant. Using all the knowledge that I gained from previous jobs. And I utilize that with the flexibility to do the things I want to do as far as personally and have the time I need to do the things I want to do. And obviously I worked hard early part of my career. So the financial aspect of my retirement is already set in place. So I do what I need to do as far as maintaining the income. I'm not really a person who's living a certain lifestyle. But also I also enjoy what I do. I'm not under as much stress as I used to be. That sounds like a great situation. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? I'm not, well, I'm not totally outgoing. But I'm not extremely shy. I'm probably right in the middle. Maybe more towards outgoing. But I'm not totally outgoing. I mean, when I'm around other people, I am in a social situation. I guess you could consider me an outgoing person. But obviously I do have my own little private issues that I keep to myself. Can you tell me about that? Oh, sure. You know, I have, a couple years ago I had a heart attack. And I had had bypass operation. And it had, yeah. It had to do with stress and things like that. I don't talk about that much other than those around me that are close to me. If I meet someone new, I don't just openly say, well, you know, I've experienced this, this, and this. I just basically, if it comes up, I won't deny it. Or if it comes up and I feel like it's something to talk about, I will talk about it. Okay. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the Fishtank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? Actually, my relaxation is I'm currently living with my mom, my mother. And she's a senior citizen. She's alone. So what I do for relaxation or to relieve stress is I actually help her do yard work. Take care of all the gardening and things like that. That's actually very therapeutic, you know. How are you at controlling your temper? I'm not a short-fused kind of person. It takes a lot to get me really angry. So as far as my temper is concerned, there's not much to that. Okay. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? I'm trying to think here. I can't recall when the last time it was, but it was probably last year sometime when I had a creditor that I was dealing with being very difficult to work with. And I owed money as far as some medical expenses that were incurred when I had my heart attack a few years ago. And they weren't very understanding of the situation. And I really got a little upset about that because I felt like I was being honest with them. And I was more than willing to take care of my issues. But they were playing hardball and I didn't care for that. Yes. That sucks. It does. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Probably the hardest decision I ever had to make was, it had to do with a life and death situation with my stepfather who was battling prostate cancer. And making a decision with my mother whether to proceed with a procedure that was going to either help him, there was a slight chance it was going to help him even though he was pretty terminal at that point. Or it would kill him. And that was really tough. It was a really tough decision to make. But I felt like if I didn't try and see if we could help save his life or if we didn't take a chance and take that extra step that I would regret it in the long run. Yes. That sounds really hard. It is. It was. Tell me about your relationship with your stepfather. What was your relationship like with your family? Well, right now I'm separated from my wife so she has her issues, I have my issues. But we are not divorced. We are just separated. And we still have a relationship where we still speak to each other. We just don't live together. And the relationship with my mother is really great. She's very understanding. I'm an only child. So she likes having me around. Which is good because she's in her later stage of her life. She's 82 years old. And so she needs to, I guess it's good that in its own way maybe fate is taking place because, you know, someone 82 years old by themselves in a huge house is not a good thing. But with me there, I think there's a comfort level she feels with me there. Especially being her only child. Yeah. What's something you feel guilty about? Probably the most guilty I feel about anything are the things that I did to hurt my marriage. As far as the things that I did, the selfish things that I did when I was much younger that obviously affected the relationship between myself and my wife. Can you give me an example of that? Yeah. I got caught up in a situation where I was working tremendous amounts of hours under a lot of stress. My wife was also working a lot of hours in a job that she had. And we were growing apart. And when she was away, my form of release was to go to the casinos and gamble. And so, you know, I spent a lot of time in the casinos. And what eventually happened was I spent a lot of money. And obviously that was a major issue regarding our relationship. It had to do with trust because it was devastating to my wife. Yeah. How did you feel in that moment? I felt when it came to light, I felt very guilty. And I felt less than a human being at that point in my life. I'm sorry. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No, not at all. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No, not really, no. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? I don't have problems sleeping. I don't ever recall having any problems sleeping, so no. That's good. Do you feel down? No, not at all. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or response lately? No. The only thing I could say is after I had my heart attack a few years ago, I find myself not letting the small details or small things in life bother me as much as they did before. So I tend to be a little bit more easygoing, and my friends and family have noticed that. How do you feel about your life? It's great. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. The last time I felt really happy? Probably when I had a visit with my cardiologist after my heart attack. And he basically said to me that after many tests and many months of rehabilitation that he was happy to explain to me that there was no scar tissue, no major scar tissue that had occurred with my heart because of my heart attack, and that I could count on living a pretty much normal life as long as I watched my diet and took my medications. That's so good to hear. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? Well, I guess number one thing is my physical being itself. I like to be a little bit more healthier, lose some more weight. Just in general, just be more healthier physically. And as far as mentally, just not go back to those ways of thinking where I was doing the wrong things instead of the right things, and not to be so selfish. How do you cope with that? Just one day at a time. I just try to be at peace with myself and try to have some peace of mind on a daily basis. I meditate, I read some books, I watch TV. I do things that I know that if I can, if I can help myself, I do things to help myself. Is there anything you regret? Well, there's a lot that I regret, obviously. My marriage, my working career as far as I had a long career with this major food chain. And I basically, because of my gambling issues, I ended up ruining a very good career. But at this point right now, there's not much I can do. I can't change what's been done. So I don't focus too much on the past. I just look at what's in front of me and just focus on what's in front of me every day. Yeah. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? What advice? Wake up and see what you're doing to yourself and make the changes that need to be changed. You know, I'm not a... I'm not someone that's not intelligent, but I was intelligent enough to know what's right from wrong. And what you're doing is wrong. You need to change your behavior immediately. Uh-huh. What are you most proud of in your life? Probably... What I'm proud about overall is the fact that I did all these awful things, but deep down, I don't think as a person I'm a bad person. I have to remember that when I was caught up in all the gambling and compulsive behavior, it was because I had an illness, a compulsive... obsessive compulsive behavior that made me ill. And that I was a sick person just trying to become healthy. And every day, that's what my life is about. It's about recovery and just making sure that I do the right things from the time I wake up in the morning to the time I go to sleep at night. One day at a time. Yeah. How hard is that? It's not as hard as you think. But it is a process where you need to be diligent about your behavior. Yeah. And your routines. And just know that what's not right for you. You know, it could be okay for other people to do certain things, but I cannot do those things anymore. Uh-huh. How would your best friend describe you? Most of my best friends describe me as probably easy going, generous, a nice person to be around. And, you know, they were obviously a little shocked when they found out of all my issues related to the gambling and the breakup of my marriage, which, you know, it's still not over yet, you know. Uh-huh. Tell me how you spend your ideal weekend. Well, my ideal weekend starts off usually after I have breakfast with my mother early in the morning, like around 6 a.m. to 6 o'clock. I go to a local park, and it's about, this park is probably laid out where you can walk up a hill and down a hill. It's about three and a half miles, and I take a brisk walk in the morning, get my blood flowing and get my heart rate going. And then after that, I, you know, go home, work in the yard a few hours, take a shower and relax, and just kind of kick back for the rest of the day. And then the next day, I do the same thing again. In the morning, I go for a walk, work out in the yard, watch TV, whatever, just relax. That's how a weekend goes for me. Nice. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thank you. Goodbye. Bye. . Lock yourself out. . Okay. I actually got comfortable talking to you. Good, good. Is that the way the future is going to be, like if you're going to talk to a therapist? That's pretty cool.