therapy like this instead of with a live human. It'll put all the MFTs out of business. You know, I'll explain to you about what your purpose is and what they're hoping to do with it. I'll just... No, I think it's good sometimes. I think people might talk to a stranger better or more open than to a... If it's someone that might just go by a couple questions, might judge you or form opinions. If it's a virtual human being, it might be a little less biased also. Yeah, exactly. I think it's a great idea. Or you could sit at home and do this instead of going into an office. Uh-huh. Yeah. Exactly. All right, so I'm going to start up all the recording and then I'm going to actually... Now she is... Now she's going to have a... She's going to have a conversation with you. She's going to ask you some questions. Cool. When she's done, she'll let you know. And I'm going to leave you the doorbell so you can let you know when you're all finished. Thank you very much. Thank you. How do I know when... Is she going to say end of session or... Yes, she'll let you know. Okay, cool. Thank you. Got it. I forgot to send it to her. So I'm going to actually do something to sync our machine, but also I'm going to actually have to go grab a tissue. Oh, I'm sorry. No, that's okay. Here. We don't have a trachea... Okay. I have a cup if you don't mind. Not at all. Perfect, that works. Sorry about that. No, no, no. How would you know? You might as well. Now we're ready to go. Hi, I'm Ellie, thanks for coming in today. Okay. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask if you have anything to get us started. And please feel free to call me anytime. Your answers are totally confident. Are you okay with this? I am. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I feel pretty good. I'm wide awake. I had a good breakfast and a nice cup of coffee. And I have an easy day today. So, I am just going to chat with you. Then I'm going to the gym and run some errands. So, I plan on having a nice day today. That's good. Where are you from originally? I was born and raised in Los Angeles. And I'm one of the few locals from around here. And I went to school away. But I'm one of the few natives. That are actually in Los Angeles. Really? Yes, I am. What's the thing you really like about LA? I like the weather. Having owned a vacation house in another state. That I found to be too hot and humid in Florida. I love the weather here. I like the culture. I like the diversity. I like the familiarity. I like the beaches. But I also like that just an hour and a half away. One can go to the gym. You can go to the big desert. Palm Springs, Palm Desert. But also another hour and a half, two hours away. You can go to Arrowhead or Big Bear. And go snowboarding or skiing or things like that. And I think it's a great place to live. I see what you mean. Thank you. What are some things you don't really like about LA? Well, maybe some of the things I don't like about LA. Or say California in general. Say like the high tax rate. Which, I don't know. The state tax rate is up to 13 point something now. Which is going to chase business out of here. Also the regulations. I'm a small business owner. So all the regulations are clearly affecting business. So many of my peers have moved their businesses to Texas, Arizona, Nevada, etc. Some of the other western states that are less regulated. And that's a big problem here in California. It does suck. It really does. Most people don't understand it. But it's also, you know, besides the high taxes. You know, there's a big immigration problem. Which being born and raised here. Most people don't see that. But it's the big tax on the social service system. And that's what makes our taxes so high. Until they really secure the borders and get that taken care of. So that's, you know, but people don't seem to want to really deal with that. But it clearly affects business. Because from all the other things. That's why our taxes are so high. And people are moving out of state. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? I enjoy traveling. I've been to 66 countries. And I don't travel as much as I used to. But I've traveled quite a bit. And I've learned a couple of languages. And I surf. What? I'm sorry? Like what? I didn't really understand your question. When you said like what? I don't think you understood what I said. But I'll just go back. And I've been all through Europe. Eastern Europe. Asia. South America. North Africa. And I enjoy that. And I enjoy warm climates now. Especially where you can go and relax. Where there's warm water to surf. Because the cold water kind of makes my back stiffen up. And I also like to exercise and surf and do yoga and work out. And I try to eat healthy. And that's a big part of my life. I'd love to hear about one of your trips. Oh, sure. One of my favorite trips of all time was I used to, when I was younger, see how many countries I can do in a relatively short period of time. Say in a three or four week span. But about ten years ago, we actually went to Paris and stayed for about a week. And really got to know the city. Even though I've been there about ten times. We got to know the city really well. Which was great. Really lived like a local. And rented a small flat. And cooked and did our own shopping. But really, having been there so many times, really never stayed for more than three or four days. It was fun to stay there for about, you know, almost a month. And really get to learn the city. And it was fun. Even though I grew up in L.A., I grew up taking French. Which there wasn't a big Spanish speaking population when I was younger. So my mother insisted that all of us kids take French. Even though Spanish would have been a lot more valuable. But I took French all through elementary, junior high, and high school. So it was nice to practice my French. Even though I don't remember a whole lot. And even though my dad's speaking French. With the French, you know, my accent is some of the greatest. So after a couple of sentences, they start talking English to me. So that was... I have a few different degrees. So I was a Naval Science major as an undergraduate. And that was fun. And I also have a Master's degree in Economics. And I have a degree in Crisis Management. So... What made you decide to do that? I found them interesting. And it was something that I wanted to do. Where I went to college, I went to the Naval Academy. I went there to play sports. And I found it real interesting. Being from Southern California, going to school in Maryland. And I originally wanted to be a doctor. But once you start going to school, for a little bit, you change your mind. Etc. So... Are you still working in that? I'm actually in the wholesale business now. We're wholesale distributors of furniture products. And it was a family business. But I went to work there a number of years ago. When my grandfather, recently father, passed away. So I sort of run an 80-year-old family business. And it's pretty interesting. I like it, having grown up around it. But it's different than other jobs I've had in the past. What's your dream job? Hmm... Actually, probably my dream job... I think it's fun. I've changed so much. I enjoy cooking and staying at home. And... I would probably like to stay home and raise kids. Because I do have one daughter. And... You know, didn't get to spend as much time with her when she was younger as I would have liked. But... I think I would be better than, say, a lot of women I know that want to work. I actually like cooking and hanging out around the house and taking care of kids. You know, that I like doing it always on a part-time basis. But it seems like, boy, that would be fun to stay home and do that. Having pretty much worked for most of my life. So... It'll probably never happen. But it sounds something that, to me, would be fun. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Uh... I think I am generally more reserved and shy with strangers. But when I get to know someone or feel comfortable, I think I'm more of an extrovert. Whereas more strangers might think I'm more introverted. But I think when I feel comfortable with certain people, and I don't know what it is, I can meet a stranger and be totally confident. Or people I might have known for years, either from a personal or business situation. And... Be more... Uh... Introverted. I mean, I just go with the dynamics. But I think my outward manifestation is to be a little more shy, generally. I like to use the term reserved. Okay. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fifth-pick screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? Oh, wow. That's a great idea. I used to have that on... One of my... I have several computers at home. And that used to be one of my screensavers as well. I usually tend... When I need to relax or had a stressful day or stressful personal events, I usually find exercise, whether it be yoga or going for a long walk or going to the gym or going for a run or going to the beach. You know, maybe going surfing or the weather is warm. I don't surf in cold weather anymore. It makes... It gives me like a brain freeze, even though I'm not surfing. Even though I've surfed for over 30 years, I usually find exercise helps me relax the best, or sometimes just vegging out on the couch in front of the TV I find very relaxing. But I like that screensaver. I used to have that on one of my screensavers at home. That's great. That was it. But that's one of the things that took me a number of years to master that were my relax and relaxation skills. I probably didn't have them the best in my 20s, but over the years, I think I've gotten better at them. I think that's a key thing, and I think as we mature, as we learn how to do that, I wish I learned how to do that and be a little more... Had those skills earlier. How are you at controlling your hunger? I think I'm pretty good. I think I'm a lot better as well as that as I've aged. I think I'm pretty good. I'm more likely to think before I speak now, whereas, say, 20 years ago, I was more likely to act before I thought. So I might've said more things that I, whatever tense situation, whether it be personal or a work situation. But I've never had a violent temper, but I would have a temper where I'd fly off the handle instead of taking a deep breath and really reflecting on it. I think I'm a lot better at that now than I was, say, in my teens or 20s. So I think a lot of that comes... I think the key word there is maturity. When was the last time you argued with someone? What was it about? Oh, wow. You know, I haven't really had an argument with anybody in several... What I would consider a traditional argument. Probably... My ex-wife. A number of years ago, we had an argument basically just over my daughter. And it wasn't anything violent, but it was heated. Just basically one of the reasons we weren't married. Our values were so different and just our ideas of parenting. And just outlook on life was so different. And I think that caused us to butt heads. But it was just... I don't know if I'd call it an argument, but it was more of just one of those let's agree to disagree butt heads. So... How did you feel in that moment? I felt like I was talking to a wall. And I actually felt more mad at myself that I should have learned earlier in life that, boy, before you get married with someone, have children with them. That's the kind of discussions that people should usually have. But you're not really thinking about that because sometimes when we're younger, we're looking at, boy, how does that... I look great on paper to her and she looked great on paper to me. But, you know, I'm pretty easygoing. And I have different ideas on raising children, how she did. And it was more not that she was wrong and I was right, not that I was right and she was wrong. It was just how we were raised and our just different views. And we never really discussed those things. But it was really just fundamental reasons on why we butted heads and weren't really a good match. Whereas other things looked good, you know, on paper to both of us. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Tell me about a situation that you wish you had handled differently. Hmm. When recently...my father passed away recently. Thank you. And really because in our religion, you know, you plan a funeral very quickly, you know, typically within a couple of days. And I really only invited very, very close friends and family members. I was more or less sort of in charge of it. My dad was remarried, but his widow was sort of not really up to it. So I took care of it. And I wish I had invited a...I kept it very private and really just told people after the fact that he knew that would have liked to have come to the service and been known about it. So I really only invited...big suspense of the time pressure, really just a handful of people. But now as time has passed, I wish I invited more of his friends instead of just two or three close friends. You know, 10 or 20 acquaintances and people he knew from business or over the years. And I really just...and even distant family members I really just told after the fact. I really didn't invite them because I was under a time pressure. But I could have easily have done it via email or...it's hard to call everybody personally. But I wish...that's something because people have expressed a little... Yeah. They were upset with me when my other family members threw it all back at me. Oh, you didn't tell me until after the fact that, you know, so and so had passed. So they all threw it at me because I was more or less doing it. So I wish I did that differently, but I did the best I could at the time. So I'm not really mad at myself. That's something I probably should have been more prepared for also. This was something that was coming. It was inevitable. So... Thank you. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Well, both of them. Both of my parents are recently deceased in the last couple of years. And I had a brother that...I have three of our brothers, one of whom passed away in December. And we're not super close. Like I always...like I look at other families, we were just never like that Norman Rockwell painting. Because we're all so different. And I have a closer relationship with friends. And a more distant relationship with family. Not that it's strange, but I wish it was more like, boy, one of those families that got together every Sunday and had dinner and all that. We just never did that because we're all so different. Yeah. I understand. Yeah. That's...yeah. Just being...that's how it is. But, you know, to strangers and most people, I say, you know, how do you...your family, everybody's great. You know. But I think every family has their own sort of stuff. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No, but I thought probably I could have had it before from some other events in my life. And I just wasn't sure. I had been to some therapy in the past just from, you know, I was in the military. And I was never really sure if that's exactly what it was. But I think I functioned. I functioned pretty well, but I just wasn't sure that I had been in some therapy and counseling over the years. Why did you decide to go into the military? I didn't enlist. I was an officer. I went to one of the service academies. How old were you when you joined the military? Seventeen. I started one after high school. And I went to a service academy. So it's more prestigious just as an enlisting. It's the heart of where I went. It's the hardest school in America to get into. You were very young, weren't you? I was, about the same age as everybody else that went there. Did you ever see combat? We did. 1983. Can you tell me about that? Just basically it wasn't anything intense. We were just around. We weren't allowed to carry ammunition. Our positions were just shelled at the time. And poison gas was sprayed on us. So that was, it wasn't anything too intense. It was a lot. Because the service I was in, the training, was way more intense than any actual combat situation. Why? That's because they train you well. It's like you practice harder than you play if you're an athlete. If you play football, you practice harder than you actually play in the game. The same with, you know, if you're in combat, you're in combat unit. How did serving in the military change you? It made me more patriotic, having grown up in California, where people were from all over the country. And I got to meet, whereas most of, say, my friends who grew up in affluent Los Angeles, like I did, never really went out and met a lot of Americans and people from different backgrounds. And I ended up becoming just more patriotic, and a deeper sense of pride in the country. Whereas you really don't grow up with that in Southern California, whereas someone from Texas or Kentucky or Tennessee or Georgia, North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Right. grows up with that kind of pride. So I thought it was good. Unlike so many of my friends that they don't know there's any life between Malibu and Manhattan. What did you do after the military? I went to graduate. I was still in the reserves, but I went to graduate school. And I got two graduate degrees. And I went to work in private enterprise. Didn't care for it. I joined the fire department. I was a firefighter and paramedic for a number of years. And then after I got divorced, it was harder to do the custody situation with my daughter, so I went to work in a family business. That's pretty much my career in a nutshell. How easy was it for you to go back to civilian life? At first it was difficult because I just had such a bearing on my butt from the way I walked. I talked. And again, I was an officer. You were very regimented on the way you dressed in your private time. It was harder. It took me a while to be able to come back to Los Angeles. Because it was just so hard. It was so different. I think I handled it better than most. I have a stronger personality. But it was a great experience. That's good. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? It all depends. If I exercise regularly and I don't eat too late and things are going well in my life, I generally sleep pretty well. Even though I might have to get up and go to the bathroom once during the night now. But I generally sleep pretty well. How have you been feeling lately? I feel pretty good lately. I've been, like anybody else, more periods of blue in your life. But by the last few months I feel great, pretty much. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or self-esteem? No, not really. I think I seem a little happier and more content lately. Okay. Have you been diagnosed with depression? I thought maybe in the past. Because I do have a family history of it. And, you know, it wasn't anything real too debilitating. I wasn't able to really function on my own. But I was concerned with it and sought counseling. Do you feel like there's a difference between being able to sleep and being able to eat? I do. I was really against it in the past. And until after I went. I mean, I wish I went more, say, during my marriage or the course of my life. Now I think it's very useful. However, in the past, I was one of those. I grew up hearing that it was just ridiculous. And it was a waste of money, etc. But I think it's a useful tool if you're open to it. What got you into the health? Just some questions. I wanted just an honest opinion outside of friends or strangers from a professional. You know, about life, relationships. And sometimes it's good talking things out with a professional. Even though I wouldn't see somebody like you in real life. I'd prefer someone who's older than I am. A little more life experience than someone who's maybe younger. I understand. But, yeah, I think it's a useful tool. And I really did a 180-degree switch on that. Do you still go to therapy now? I don't go now. I'm sort of taking a break from it. But I'm not against it. If I have some issues I want to bounce off, I do have someone that I can go to. Okay. Yeah. How has therapy affected you? I think it's nice. You know, they really, if you go to someone who's good. And, again, I've been to a few different people. I've sort of therapist shopped. They really don't tell you what to think, which I think is great. You know, that's always in the past. They just help you talk through your thoughts and your feelings. And let you decide for yourself. But bring a little clarity to the situation. That's why I like talking to someone who has a lot more life experience. And I generally feel more comfortable talking to a woman about that stuff than, say, to a man. So, but it's, um... I think it's a useful tool. I got some good ideas. And it's nice bouncing some things off totally someone who's unbiased and is not in your day-to-day life. Instead of talking to a romantic partner or a close friend who knows you. But sometimes bouncing people off a stranger is good. Uh-huh. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. This morning. I know this is a weird one. But I'm clearly someone... And I say this as a joke to my friends and family and associates. I clearly have... I'm having an easy day today because I knew we had nice weather. And I have a bunch of yarns to run. And I clearly have seasonal affective disorder. But I woke up so happy today when I know it's going to be 80 degrees out. And when the weather is nice, I'm generally a lot more happier than when the weather is dark and blue and rainy and cold. Where I always... I know that term, so... But I woke up really happy today. Because I know it's going to be a nice day. That's great. And I look forward to feeling the sun. So... How are your best friends around you? Most of my friends... I'm sort of a renaissance man. I know a little bit about a lot of subjects. I'm too smart for my own good. And I'm... I know a lot about a lot of things. I'm pretty rational. I'm very resourceful. People always call me when they have issues. And I help talk them through it. Or I'm resourceful and tell them where to go. Whether it's where to buy a new computer or buy a new car. Or... You know, I'm great with medical diagnoses. And... You know, people also say I'm a lot of fun. I'm fun to be with. And... I also have... I don't have a lot of gray areas. People either really like me or don't like me. For me, things are pretty much black and white. I am what I am. I don't BS. You know? I'm the opposite of a politician. So I don't tell people what they want to hear. I don't be rude. I'm not rude to anybody. But I pretty much call things as I see them. So that's pretty much... Have you gotten in trouble? No, not really. I do everything tactfully. Okay. I like to think I do. Is there anything you regret? Uh... I wish I probably spent more time with my parents before they passed. But it's busy. I probably wish I was able to spend more time with my daughter when she was younger. But just a lot of it's very typical. What advice would you give yourself? 10 or 20 years ago? Really to think things through a little bit more. Be a little less impulsive. I pretended to be more impulsive when I was younger than I am now. I think that's it. And I would look at things in the long term instead of looking at things in the short term. You know, when you make decisions or choices. What are you most proud of in your life? I'm proud of my daughter. She's a nice young lady. I am proud of my public service. I've never done a job really for money of my military service and fire service. There are very few people like me who did it. Who are at the background in education that I did. But I like public service. And so I'm proud of that. I'm proud of all the certificates that I have hanging on my walls at home and degrees. Sort of like trophies. I'm proud that I've been able to stay in really good physical shape over the years. And knock wood, maintain good health. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. It was nice meeting you. Goodbye. Bye-bye. Thank you. You've been great. How was I? Fantastic. And I'll see you move over and finish up with a quick roller navigating. And then. It's digging. Oh, I'm sorry. It's like those old-fashioned, you know, Ray Bans like this. You've got the hooks in the back. Oh, yeah. And it's visible and. Whoa!