before I do that. One last one. Perfect. Okay. When she's done, you can press the doorbell. Okay. Okay. Hi. I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Sure. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing all right. That's good. Where are you from originally? New Jersey. Really? Yes. When did you move to L.A.? Three months ago. How often do you go back to your hometown? Not very often. How does it compare to L.A.? It's much different. I don't know. It's just, it's a lot more crowded here. Why'd you move to L.A.? To start a new life for myself. I think I was born and raised in L.A. How easy was it for you to get used to living in L.A.? It wasn't very easy at all. It was quite rough at first, but, you know, I'm still trying to get used to life here. What are some things you really like about L.A.? I've met some good friends here. You know, I love the Hollywood area. And just, you know, the mountains are beautiful. That's the kind of things I love. Uh-huh. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? Hmm. The traffic. I understand. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? Not really. No, I don't. Why? Just haven't had the time or the finances to. Okay. What did you study at school? Digital media. That sounds interesting. How did you decide to do that? Well, I've always loved, you know, computers and, you know, designing things. And, I don't know, I just kind of fell into it. Yeah. You like essence? Are you still doing that? No. I dropped out. I love my job. You can almost say it's virtually made for me. What's your dream job? Well, I guess my dream job would be working in something that I went to school for. And I never really completed my education. Um. Okay. But I guess it would be great if I went, you know, back to school and . . . you know, finished, you know, my degree in digital media and, you know, finished and started working, you know, doing something in that field. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? A little bit of both. You know, I can be shy at times, but I like to push myself to be outgoing. You know, it's kind of a struggle for me, but I don't want to be, you know, in a shell, so I kind of force myself to be outgoing. Yeah. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? Listen to music. I sometimes just drive and, you know, play music in my car and that helps me relax. Nice. Or I smoke a cigarette. Oh, like what? Oh, um, just heavy metal. That's all I listen to is metal. Awesome. How are you at controlling your temper? Well, it depends on how high my stress level is and how angry I am, but I do my best to not get so pissed off. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? And I don't know, she, um, she wanted me to come and pick her up. Uh, she was a little drunk and, uh, we just kind of fought over the phone, over some other things. And, uh, I just ended up not picking her up because of her attitude on the phone with me. That sucks. Yeah, it does. What's something you feel guilty about? Um, something I feel guilty about is, uh, not talking to my kids, uh, often or as often as I should. Uh, I've just been so busy. I've been so busy with trying to get myself all situated here that I, I don't really have time to, you know, talk to my kids as much as I'd like to. Yeah, that sounds really hard. You have no idea. Do you find it easy to be a parent? Um, it's, it comes natural, but it's no way easy. And, uh, it's, it's difficult. It's the hardest job that I love to do. But right now it's extremely difficult for me because they live so far away. And I, I made this choice to come out here to LA. And I feel bad that I don't see them, you know. But the reason I came out here was to better myself so I can provide for them. Yeah. What's the hardest thing about being a parent? Fear. Fear. You know, just fear what, you know, you fear what's going to happen to your kids. You fear that something awful is going to happen. And not seeing them, it brings about that fear a lot more, you know. And I can't, I can't always be there with them. I can't see them. You know, it wasn't as bad when I was living in Florida. Um. And I, at least I used to see them. It wasn't very often, but I still used to see them. Now I don't see them at all. And that's the, that's the hardest thing I've had to do as a parent is to step away from my kids, if only temporarily. I don't know how long I'm going to be here for. I don't know what my future holds. But the hardest thing is being so far away from them. Yeah. I'm sorry. I'm sorry to hear that. What's the best thing about being a parent? Just the joy that they bring to me. I mean, I could be having a bad day and they just cheer me right up. I mean, it sucks being away from them for, for so long and they're so far away and just not seeing their faces. That's it's, it's the worst thing ever, you know. But. I love to just see their faces. They just bring a smile to my face. And I don't know. What are some ways that you're different as a parent than your parents? Well, I think the fact that I can get down to their level. Um. I'm a bit goofier as a father than my dad was with me. My dad was, you know, strict all the time. Sure, he used to, you know, laugh and play with us. But, you know, he was always very reserved, you know. And he kind of held back a lot of his emotions just because, you know, he was a, he was a strong, very tough guy. Um. But with me, I, I'm very goofy and silly with my kids and I'm strict with them. When I have to be. But I always love to, you know, play around with them as much as possible. You know, not, I don't want them to grow up too fast. That, that may have been, yeah. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. Well. A situation that I wish I would have handled differently. There's so many. Uh. I guess when I was still with my ex-wife in Florida. I wish I wouldn't have gotten so angry or I wish I wouldn't have let her get the best of my emotions. She had a tendency to get underneath my skin and, you know, keep picking at me until I exploded. And. I allowed her to do that. You know, I should have just walked away when I could. And, um, you know, not let my temper get the best of me. Okay. Have you ever served in the military? No. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. How is it? What is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Uh, sometimes it's hard. Um, sometimes I just lay awake in bed, you know, thinking all the things that are going through my head. All the, you know, all the stress that I'm going through with work and, you know, making sure, you know, wondering if I'm going to, if I'm going to be able to make, you know, rent. You know, wondering what my kids are going through. You know, when I'll see them again. If they even care about me anymore. If they even know they have a father. You know, those are some of the things that run through my head and, and that keeps me up at night sometimes. Do you think that maybe you're being a little hard on yourself? A little. But, you know, I put myself in this situation. So. You know, I gotta bear with it. You know, I gotta, you know, reap what you sow. So, I, I gotta deal with it in my own way. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? Lately? Um, I've been trying to not think so much about, you know, my family. You know, all that's going on in my life. I try to distract myself. And that kind of gets me in a better mood. You know, if I hang out with friends or just watch a little TV. Something to get my mind off, you know, all the stresses in my life. That's good. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. The last time I felt really happy. Uh, was actually a couple of nights ago. I went out drinking with, um, with a couple of my friends from work. And, um, I don't know. We just got pretty drunk. And that kind of helped me to forget all the crap that was previously going through my head. So, if, if I can distract myself. If I can forget about all that other stuff. Then I'm happy. Uh-huh. What would you say are some of your best qualities? Some of my best qualities. I guess that I'm convincing. Um, I'm kind of like a, I guess you would say, a counselor to some people. You know, some of my close friends. You know. I may talk people into doing things that they may regret. Or I may, I mean, I'm sorry. Talk people out of things that they, you know, may end up regretting. Or I may, um, you know, just listen to people. So, you know, I can say that, you know, I definitely, you know, listen to my friends. And help them out in their time of need. When they're going through some troubling times like, like I'm going through. Can you give me an example of that? Uh, lives in Florida. You know, I talk to him every now and then. And he's been having troubles with his girlfriend. And, you know, I just kind of talk to him about his problems and listen. I mainly listen because, you know, I don't think he has anybody else to listen to. You know, when I was living in Florida, I was very close with him. So, you know, he, he always relied on me. And now that I'm here in LA, I don't want to lose that, you know, connection with him. Because, you know, I've always been there for him. So, he, um, he relies on me to listen to his problems and give him some advice. You know, about what I think, you know, he should do. Um, so I, I think he appreciates that. And I, and I'm glad that he, you know, relies on me for that. And that he trusts me enough to tell me all that stuff. That's great. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? I don't know. Um, sometimes I wish I wasn't so kind or generous. It seems bad, but sometimes I, I don't know, people may take advantage of me. And I may not realize it. And, um, I don't like saying no to people. I like to always please people. So if I can change that, maybe I will. I wish I wasn't such a people pleaser. Has that gotten you in trouble? Sometimes financially in trouble. Sometimes I, you know, I, you know, help others. And that, you know, that may make me broke sometimes. Yeah. I may not have enough to pay bills. But I feel better helping people. I don't know. Yeah. Is there anything you regret? I regret not breaking up with my ex-wife sooner. Why? Because she put me through so much crap in my life. And, um, I was always trying to be a people pleaser. I was trying to please her. You know, trying to please my kids as much as I can by not breaking up, you know, the family. But, there's only so much one person can take. And I think probably if I would have left sooner, I may have been happier. And things may not have gotten so out of control out of hand like they did. You know, during all those years with her. So, if I would have got out sooner, I don't know. I would have been happier, I guess. I see. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Um, it's okay to be selfish. It's okay to, you know, think about yourself sometimes. You know, if you keep putting everyone ahead of you, then you're not thinking about yourself. You're not thinking about what makes you happy. And even though pleasing people may make you happy, you have to think about yourself sometimes too. And about your needs. Because, you know, you play in the game. You play an important role in the lives of your close family members. And, um, in order to keep everything afloat, you sometimes gotta be, gotta worry about the one person that's, you know, juggling everything and holding everything up, which is yourself. So, be a little selfish sometimes. It's okay. Right. I don't even know what a weekend is anymore. My ideal weekend would be locked away, alone in my room, watching movies, listening to music, just with my cell phone off, and not, you know, being with anybody. Or, it could be out at a bar, you know, or, you know, watching a metal hit. Or, a show. So, I like to be alone. But, at times, I, I do want to be out with, with others. I like, you know, being around people. Uh-huh. How would your best friend describe you? Crazy. He thinks I'm, uh, I'm crazy for coming out here. But, I guess he would say that I'm dedicated, and that I'm strong-minded, and that, you know, whatever I set my mind to, I can do it, you know, no matter how hard it is, I'm not gonna wimp out. So, I mean, I, I really respect him for giving me his insight. But, uh, I guess, yeah, I guess he would say that I'm crazy, but, uh, strong-minded. What are you most proud of in your life? My kids. You know, that's the one thing that brings joy to me. You know, like, real, real joy are my kids. And, you know, just having them in my life is, is the proudest thing I could ever accomplish, is just, you know, having them in my life. And, although I don't know what they're like, I don't get to see them as much. Even when I think about them, just thinking about, you know, how far they've gone, you know, what, what they've accomplished in their, you know, in their short time, yeah, it makes me happy. And I can't wait to see them again. What's one of your most memorable experiences? One of my most memorable experiences? I guess that would be... What was your favorite night in Florida? In Florida. You know, going to see our, you know, our favorite band, Skeleton Witch. It was, it was a great night overall. You know, one of the nights I'll never forget. Just because we've been looking forward to it for, you know, so many months, and, you know, it finally happened. It was surreal. It was, it was a great night after all, and overall. Nice. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Sure, you're welcome. Goodbye. Bye. Take that off. Where'd she go? All right, let me go ahead and just stop these things.