Okay, so she's going to chat with you. I'm going to bring that doorbell back over here. So when she's done, she'll let you know, and you can push that button to let me know. Okay, sounds good. Uh-huh. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yeah. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm great. Good. I'm great. Thanks. Where are you from originally? Los Angeles, California. Really? What are some things you really like about L.A.? I like the diversity. I feel L.A. by itself is a country. There's so much to do, so much to explore, and there's nothing like it. I see what you mean. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? Traffic. I would say traffic. And I really think prices are... They're kind of crazy compared to the rest of the country. But other than that, then, you know, that's fine. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes, I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? I have traveled. I have traveled a bit. I would like to travel more, though. I've traveled. I've been to a few countries. Like what? I've been to... I want to say Europe. That's a continent. I've been to London. I was born here, but my family's from Nigeria, so I've been to Nigeria a few times. I've been to Denmark. Amsterdam. I've been to... Where else have I gone? Germany. And I think that's it. Yeah, I think that's it. Awesome. Yeah. What do you enjoy about traveling? Just exploring. Exploring new places, seeing new things, meeting new people, a different culture. It definitely gives you an appreciation for life and the diversity of it. And also, going to countries that may not be as developed as the U.S., it definitely gives you a greater appreciation of, you know, this country. Yeah. Yeah. I'd love to hear about one of your trips. Okay. Well, let's see. London. I actually... Actually, when I first heard about going to London, I really didn't care for it because I didn't know much about it. The only thing I remember is watching Mary Poppins. And... But when I went there, I absolutely fell in love with it. Just... It has the hustle and bustle of L.A., but at the same time, you can go at a very, very slow pace. We didn't do any driving. We just went on the two... We went on the two-way subway line. Which is there, like, the underground subway station, which I absolutely fell in love with. And just exploring different parts of the city. We went to, you know, Big Ben, Westminster Abbey. They actually had... When I went there, they had the premiere of... What movie was this? Slumdog Millionaire. And also, they had the premiere for Seven Pounds. It was a movie with Will Smith. They did. So, Will Smith was over. And then we were, you know... Me and my friends were kind of, like, screaming like we were, like, groupies. Just to, you know... Just to, you know... For antics. But, yeah. It was a lot of fun. It was a lot of fun. Yeah. Business management. And an option in human resources management. What that means, I have no idea. Yeah. How did you decide to do that? Um... Good question. I've always... I've always wanted to go into business. And I've always wanted to study finance. But I didn't think I would learn too much about finance from college, per se. I think I've learned more in the real world, whatnot. So, the other option was human resources. And I'm always fascinated about, you know, relationships and people. Always, like, reading articles about that stuff. So, I went for that. Cool. Yeah. Are you still doing that? No. Well, I still kind of use what I've learned. But I work in property management. So, it still has to do with people. Anything to do with people, I'm fascinated about. So, yeah. I love my job. You could almost say it's virtually made for me. What's your dream job? That was a good one. My dream job. Wow. I would say being a life coach. Really? Yeah. I would say that was my dream job. Because I love helping people become successes. And I love being a part of someone else's success. Regardless of how small it is. Whether it be words of encouragement or helping somebody figure out a situation. I just like helping people have a better life. So, I think, you know, I do it for myself. I do it for free. I do it for free. Like, all day. Yeah. That's great. Yeah. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? More outgoing. Definitely more outgoing. I'm usually the life. Well, it's weird because I'm usually considered like the life of the party. I'm the one who's cracking jokes and making everybody laugh. At the same time, I can be very, very quiet and to myself. So, yeah. Okay. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. Right. What do you do to relax? To relax. I usually listen to music. I usually listen to music to relax me. Or I pray to relax myself. Or listen to some really calm music. So. Yeah. Yeah. How are you at controlling your temper? Very good. Very, very good. I used to. I wouldn't say it was a bad temper, but I was known to go off, quote, unquote. Not in a, you know, not throwing chairs or anything like that. But I'm a very, very patient person. But once that patient is gone and for you to do that, you have to really, really. Really, really push my buttons for a long time. And once it's done, I just go off. Has that gotten you in trouble? No. Mm-mm. No. When was the last time you argued with someone? What was it about? The last time I argued with someone? Wow. I haven't argued with somebody in a long time. Um. Boy. Mm-mm. I argued with my. My. No. I would say my. I think my dad. I argued with him. Um. About. What was it about? Um. We were disagreeing on some things about when we were going to supposed to go back to Nigeria. And he wasn't listening to. It was kind of like a group discussion. Myself and my. My siblings. And. And he was being very subjective. He wasn't being open to other people's suggestions and concerns. So, um. It started an argument. How did you feel in that moment? Uh. Very. Uh. I wouldn't say angry, per se. But I felt very. Kind of like I was losing control. Like, um. Uh. I'm the type where I like to be in control of my emotions and my thoughts. And I feel once that patience is gone and I start going off. It's kind of like this. This, uh. You know. I don't call it a blur. But. I'm very witty and quick with what I say. So. I'll instantly say something that. You know. Uh. Not to say hurtful. But. Um. Very direct into that. And I try to be the point. And I make sure I get my point across. Uh huh. Yeah. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Um. I have three brothers. One. One younger. Two older. And I'm very close to my family. And my mom was one of my best friends. Um. My brothers are great. Um. Love them to death. Uh. My father. Eh. He's more so out of the picture. Um. He's a man. Yeah. Um. What's something you feel guilty about? Hmm. I don't. I don't really. I'm not the guilty type. I don't feel guilty. I'm not one to shy away from what I've done. And I definitely own up to what I do. I'm not one to shy away from responsibility. But I don't think I ever feel guilty. For anything I do. yeah i don't think i feel i usually don't feel guilty okay yeah how easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep pretty pretty easy um pretty easy at you know pretty good at falling asleep except when i'm excited or i'm reading i'm trying to when i'm when i'm focused i'm learning something like i'll read and read and read even when it's past my bedtime but now i'm trying to work on waking up much earlier than what i am now and that's kind of a little bit of a struggle but i'm getting to it so how have you been feeling lately good um i've been feeling i've been feeling fine you know i'm generally i have a very very happy disposition and so no uh you know deep depressing moods nothing like that whenever if i feel do you feel like i'm going to i don't allow myself to go to that place no no um thoughts i would say it's i wouldn't say necessary changes but i'd say more so behaviors learning how to let go of past decisions maybe and kind of how they they played their course in my life um i just sometimes i kind of look back and say what if i did this what would have how would life be now now so those are some games i play but other than that that's it yeah yeah run so many interesting stuff but i always wanted to nanosh were you uh no no there's anything i regret i would say don't be afraid of who you are um be authentic um more importantly with your self Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Erase from my memory. That's a good one. I would say when I tell my dad that he should act like a father. Maybe I should. Can you tell me about that? Yeah. There was, that was actually one of the times I, another time I went off. Usually with him. Basically I had decided not to go to a private, not to go away for college. I decided to stay local so I could look after my little brother. And my senior year I was overloading with everything. I had maybe like, I don't know, four AP classes. I was working three jobs at the time. And I was also on track and field. So, needless to say, I was kind of like burning myself. I was kind of like burning myself out. And I wasn't doing well in AP calculus. Because I decided to go to a JC first and transfer. Also to save money for college too. And when I told him, you know, the teacher called saying I was falling asleep in class. Just because, mind you, after school I'd work an eight hour shift because I was a retail manager at the time. So, and I'd come home after that shift to do homework. Calculus let alone. So, he would get upset and I told him, I spoke to my counselor and I told him that I don't need that class to go to the JC. Because that's something I'm going to continue with. So I'm just going to, I can't drop out at that point in time. So I'm just going to, you know, you know, just take that class. And I'm going to take the D or fail or whatever. And he didn't like that because he is a teacher. I think maybe that's where it came from. He's a teacher as well. And so, he started blaming like my job and wanting to call my boss. And it was just too much. And I told him, you know, since you're my father you should act like it. But I was, it was a more aggressive way I did it. I said it so that was one thing. Well, actually I do remember. I do regret one thing. And that is I wish I continued with college throughout. Like I burnt myself out. I was spreading myself too thin. I was actually on track to graduate from college at I want to say 19. Because I started taking college classes in high school. Starting sophomore year in high school. But I, with that stuff and the stuff with my dad and working. I just kind of like stopped going to school for a while and just worked. But I went back to finish. So, but I wish I just would have continued. Maybe that's one small thing. But that's something small though. Yeah. What would you say as somebody of that quality? I'm very. I'm a very compassionate and understanding person. I like learning new things. I'm a very, very happy person. People come to me for advice. I'm very objective. I'll tell you the good, the bad, the ugly. And yeah, those are some of my best qualities. Yeah. I'm fun. I like to have fun. I have fun in any situation. I can make light of any situation. Like I'm the kind of type of person. I can break the tension in the room. That's sort of. That's sort of a personality trait. Cool. Yeah. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? Wish I was taller. Besides my height. I wish. Maybe. I don't know if it's be more. I wouldn't say be more in touch with my emotions. I think. I would say. Understanding people's. How people feel about me. In their shoes. I think that would be one thing. Because I'm the type of person. Where. People say that they love me or care. care about me and I'm like okay great thank you I appreciate that but I don't realize how much they do I think that's realizing how much they care and love me that's one thing I would like to get more of a grasp on yeah how would your best friend describe you my best friend she describes me as someone who's funny crazy objective loyal ambitious hard-working mean why is big Joe she says you're so mean but um just I just I I just like to I joke about myself I joke about myself I joke about myself I joke about myself I joke about myself I look around all the time and so um we were right now we're actually planning a friend of mine a friend of ours um a baby shower I'm giving her some ideas and there's another friend who was invited who we had some issues in the past and someone I don't talk to or hang out with we used to be really close but I don't really talk to in person but I don't mind them being there so she also talked about having celebrating her birthday also kind of like after the baby shower and there is another friend whose birthday was before the baby shower who we didn't do anything for and I'm like well we're celebrating this person's birthday you might as well we should definitely you know honor this person's birthday as well since we're closer to you know the person whose birthday is past and I said you know what just when we celebrate everybody's birthday forget the baby shower just do the birthdays and then she said you're so mean but she was like I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I don't know I was laughing about it so yeah that's good yeah what are you most proud of in your life uh most proud of in my life um I would say being there for my family being being a mentally and emotionally strong person family's gone through a lot of challenges and a lot of times I've been the one to make sure everything goes okay and everything make sure everything make sure everything goes accordingly um so I'd say more than anything making sure I was there for my family okay yeah okay thank you goodbye bye have a good one I can take this off you wouldn't be the first one to tell her that