Are there any parameters? I mean, should I just talk naturally or just however I'm comfortable? Whatever you're comfortable with, just talk naturally. And I'm going to go ahead and just fix this. Sorry. Okay, great. One last thing and then we'll be ready. Perfect. Okay, so again, she'll let you know when she's done. I'm going to hand you the doorbell, but I'll try to keep an eye on the time as well. Okay. Thank you. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. So I'll ask a few questions. I'm going to ask you a few questions. I'm going to ask you a few questions. I'm going to ask you a few questions. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes. So, how are you doing today? I'm okay. I'm a little pensive, I guess. A little down, but more or less okay. Okay. I'm sorry. You're good. Where are you from originally? I was born in Annapolis, Maryland on the East Coast. Why did you move to LA? Originally, I moved because I went to film school, but then I decided to come. I moved back to Washington, D.C. to do some work, and now I'm back here again. How did you get here? How easy was it for you to get used to living in LA? It's very different. Being from the East Coast, it just has a different feel to it. But living in LA has a very different kind of attitude, I guess. It's a little difficult, but I've gotten more used to it since I've been here. How often do you go back to your hometown? Not at all. When I left, things got, things have sort of, I lost my job out there, and so I had to move out here kind of quick to be with some people who were going to help me out. I don't know if estranged is the right word, but I'm kind of not really speaking to my family or old friends that often. How hard is it? How hard is it to do that? It's not easy. It's kind of, I miss a lot of people. I miss my old life before I lost my job. I miss some friends. I miss a lot of the relationships that I had out there. So it's difficult. I mean, it weighs on my mind a lot. I feel like I failed. And now I'm here. And I can't do it. I can't seem to get back on my feet. So it's hard. Yeah. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Depends on the situation. I think I'm outgoing when I'm comfortable. And then I'm extremely outgoing. But when I'm in a situation I'm not comfortable with, I tend to be a lot more shy. So that doesn't really answer your question. Okay. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the Fish Tank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? I have certain, I do a lot of writing. I do a lot of writing. I have certain music that I listen to as I'm writing. And when I can get really into that and sort of shut out the rest of the world, the music and the thoughts just kind of happening really, it soothes me. It's when I feel most relaxed, I guess. When was the last time that happened? Um. Yeah. A few weeks ago, I guess. I was, I've been working on a book, on a novel. And when I was really, when I was really getting into writing it and it was really working for me, that was good. That was really good. I felt like I was accomplishing something. And I felt really relaxed. Cool. What was it about? Um. It was about a guy who is searching for something. It's, it's his last day on earth. And so he's going to find a person that he, that he met and just was so struck by that he needs to, he needs to find her and spend the last few minutes he has on earth with her just because. Sort of a, it's sort of a romantic adventure comedy kind of thing. What made you decide to do that? Well, I've always, I've always been a writer. Part of the reason I came to LA was because of screenwriting. Um. So, I wrote some screenplays and, you know, had a little bit of success with that out here. And, but since, since then I've kind of, I've been writing a lot of screenplays. I've gotten tired of the limitations of the screenwriting and I've started to write more short stories and, and longer just creative writing. So, I, I've been meaning to write a novel but I was just waiting for the idea to, to really hit me. Uh-huh. How hard is that? It's not easy. The, the parts, the parts. When it's good, it's really good but getting there is sometimes a real struggle. Um. I find it difficult. I have a real love-hate relationship with writing. When I, when I love it, I just absolutely love it. But sometimes I hate it because it's so difficult. Um. But it's worth it for the times when it's, when it's good. Yeah. I see what you mean. How are you at controlling your temper? Good. I don't, I don't really have a temper. I, it's not, I mean most of my anger that I have is directed inward as opposed to outward to other people. Um. If something is really, really stressful or if I'm in a situation like a very intense confrontation, I can lose it. But I, that's probably only happened to me three, four times in my whole life. I mean generally I pretty much try to, when I'm upset I, I get upset with myself, not with other people. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? Um. Last night I guess. Um. I got in an argument about whether or not cleaning vegetables was necessary because, you know, I had a lot of friends. I was a, I forget. But it, well, no, it was about whether you can clean vegetables after you cut them because I had already started cutting the vegetables and I thought that would be okay. So it turned into this big argument and we did Google searches to figure out who was right and who was wrong and I, I ended up being wrong on that one. But it is, yeah, that was, it wasn't a blow up argument but it was a definite argument. Okay. Okay. What's something you feel guilty about? Um. A lot. So much. Um. Uh. I, I, I was in a relationship that I really, really. Um. That I really wanted to work and, uh, I ended up, and it was partly due to, I hadn't, I was on, I wasn't on the right medication and so I was going, like everything sort of spiraled out of control and I feel really guilty about the way that that ended. I mean I wasn't, I wasn't mean but I was, but I was getting more and more messed up. And I couldn't stop it and it ended and so I feel really guilty about not doing enough and, and not. And, and, you know, making her have to tell me that she never wanted to see me again. So. That was pretty, that was pretty tough. Hmm. Have you done anything to avoid it? Well some of the things that I've done. One of it was, was that I wasn't medicated properly. I mean now I've been to a doctor and I'm on medication that's completely kind of, I mean I still get, I still get upset and I still get depressed but it's not like it was. It's not, I don't completely lose it for days at a time. Um. So. I mean I know, there's a part of me that knows logically that it wasn't all my fault. And that if I had, if I had been able to deal with the chemicals in my brain then I would have, then it would have probably been different. If I was who I am now then I would have, I would, I would be, I would be, it probably would have gone very differently. Or maybe it wouldn't have. But I mean I could have, I don't know. I don't know if I could have done anything different. Things being how they were. Yeah. Do you think that maybe you're being a little hard on yourself? I mean it's, it's possible. Uh. I mean obviously, yeah. Because I mean that's what I do. I, I take little, I mean I take little things and I just think about them all the time in my head until, until it drives me crazy. I dwell on stuff. Um. And it's like any little detail that comes up I suddenly remember and it can just throw me off for a whole day. I mean I still, I still get, I still get really uncomfortable and embarrassed and I feel ashamed about stuff that I did in high school. Which was years and years ago. Which I shouldn't even be thinking about anymore because it's so in the past. But I still get that feeling like I'm right back there. Yeah. That sounds really hard. Well it's, it's not easy. I've been trying to figure out ways to deal with it. I, I mean I dealt with it for a long time by, by, by drinking and, and you know just trying to like slow my mind down that way. Um. But you know since the medication it's been better. It hasn't been impossible to deal with. It hasn't been easy but it's, but it's been better. That's good. How do you cope with them? I mean I'm not sure. I'm not sure. Well like I said I do a lot of you know if I'm, if I'm writing or if I'm doing anything like I kind of have to almost be doing two things at once to occupy my brain completely. Um. If I'm watching TV I have to be playing a game on my phone. If I'm using the computer I have to be you know watching a TV show or a movie on you know in another window. So that I can just keep my mind occupied during all that. Um. I just need, I mean I, I wish that I could just sort of let the thoughts come and deal with them but I just, I can't yet. Are they triggered by something? They're triggered by everything. Pretty much anything that I, that I see. If I, if I, if I hear somebody with a Dutch last name. If I, if I hear somebody talk about Wisconsin. If I hear you know people talk about just anything you know I can reach back and connect to, to this. It's really, it's really, I don't know. That's the thing. I mean I don't ever get a break from it. That's tough. Yeah. How easy is it? How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Um. I don't know. I'm a very light sleeper so I'm awake and asleep and awake and asleep. I have no problem going back to sleep but I generally you know don't. I don't know. I never really needed much sleep. So it's just only recently that I've really started to, to like feel the effects of the sleep. Not getting enough sleep. Like I would, I would usually stay up until 2 or 3 in the morning so that I could just be so exhausted that I would just conk out and wake up the next day and feel fine. Go to work. Um. But now it's, it's, it's like if I do that I can't, I still don't get enough sleep. I don't conk out. I still just sleep very lightly. You know I get up. I toss and turn all night. You know and now it's just, it's. Yeah. I don't sleep too great right now. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Um. Pretty, I mean I don't know. It's hard to, it's hard to know. I, I usually just kind of power through it and just I'm, I'm like how I am now. I just, I just feel bad. Yeah. Okay. How long ago were you diagnosed? Um. I think. Three, three, four years ago. It was when I, I had been given, taking stuff for anxiety for, for years before that but that was the first time I was diagnosed. And, and I was getting better and better. But then I finally got a psychiatrist who actually sat down and talked to me and said you've actually got this situation. And we need to get you on, the medication that you're on is not working. You need to get on this new medication that will actually start to like even you out and heal you a little bit from all this. So, so yeah. Yeah, that was kind of a turning point. But unfortunately, it happened after everything went bad. So, I don't know. How did you feel in that moment? In the moment, I don't know. I don't really think I thought about it too much then. But looking back on it, I feel it really makes me angry. It really makes me, given where I am right now, it makes me really angry that I lost everything because of chemicals in my brain, because of things that I couldn't control, and that the people that were supposed to help me weren't helping me. I was paying a lot of money to go see doctors. It wasn't... It didn't help. It didn't work until I managed to find somebody who did work. And I just... Yeah, so I'm like, thanks guys for helping, but it's a little late now. Yeah. What got you to seek help? There really wasn't any choice. I had to. I was a mess. I was... It was either... I was self-medicating. It was affecting my work. I mean, it was... Everything was just... There was a point where I really realized that, I mean, I just had to make this different. But again, it was too late because then my review came up a few months later, and after everything, after being institutionalized once or twice, and all this stuff, you know, they just decided that I was just not worth keeping around. So they laid me off. But it was at least that and not firing me. But, yeah, but so I got help, but it was... But it wasn't soon enough. Okay. Do you still go to therapy now? Not as much as I should. I go to a couple of meetings. I go to AA so that I can, you know, keep control of that aspect of it. And there's a therapy aspect to that. Unfortunately, you know, being unemployed, my employment ran out. You know, I'm getting my medication from the city of L.A. So, you know, I'm not really in a position to... I'm not really in a position to put money into seeing somebody. So I have a psychiatrist that I go see, but it's really very... I've only seen her three times in the past year. So it's basically to keep my medication coming. Okay. And then there's you. Yeah. Right. What sort of changes have you noticed since you've been going to therapy? Well, like I said, I mean, just the talk. I mean, let's just take the AA, for example, because that's probably the closest that I'm seeing with therapy right now. Just saying stuff out loud is just like getting the stuff out, but trying to figure out how to take that mess that's in your stomach and in your brain and make it into words and sentences that make sense that you can actually deal with is a big step. Like, regardless of who you're saying it to, whether it's a therapist or just a room full of drugs, you know, I mean, you're taking all that stuff that's really been killing you and you're making it into something that you can deal with, something that you can write down, something that you can talk about, as opposed to just... just letting it just sit there as this formless thing. Right. Yeah. How have you been feeling lately? You know, better than I have been. I mean, it's sort of... it has its ups and downs. You know, I'm applying for jobs, five, six jobs or more a day, you know, and never getting a response. Never getting an interview. Never even getting close to being self-sufficient again. It's hard, but that's like real-world problems. I feel like the chemical parts are getting under control, like the depression is getting under control. So now it's just I have to deal with real life, which is... which has its own challenge. Yeah. It can be tough to find a good job these days. Yeah. How about the last time you felt really happy? It was probably, you know, a couple of years ago. I was... I mean, the thing that immediately comes to mind is everything was going well at my job. I was making these great videos with this person that I was having a relationship with, and we were really close. We were having fun together, and we went out and got a Christmas tree. And we spent all this time picking out the perfect Christmas tree, and it was just feeling like a part of somebody's life and feeling like a part of the bigger life that's out there. You know, like what normal people feel. You know, for that instant, I felt like a normal person doing a normal thing with a pretty girl who he really, really liked a lot. And, you know, everything was going really well. And... I mean, it wasn't going really well because it was all messed up, but for that instant, I felt like a normal person, a normal happy person. And part of what makes it so hard now is knowing that I don't know if I'll ever feel that again. So... What do you look proud of in your life? Um... Probably the... Probably this educational series I did. An educational video series I did for the National Science Foundation. It was really hard, but in the end, it turned out really good. And... I'm hoping that it helps a lot of kids. And it helps the world with getting kids excited about science and about... And about the world around them. So, that... I feel like that was a real contribution that I made to the world. That sounds interesting. How did you decide to do that? It was part of... You know, it was part of my... My job. Um... It was... It was a... We were trying to come up with... With new ideas, uh... For... Because we would put together videos and stuff to give, you know, to... To schools and everything. And they had done those before, but we decided to do something really big. You know, and there was a lot of traveling, and there was a lot of... Um... And there was a lot to it. And so... It was probably the biggest... Project... That the NSF had decided to do. And so we just kind of produced it. Awesome. Yeah. Tell me how you spend your ideal weekend. Um... I guess... Ugh... I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. It's been a... It's been a while since I've... Since I've really thought about that. I don't know. Would I go somewhere? Would I... I... I... I don't know. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Goodbye. Bye. Thank you. Howdy. Um... You look great. I think I'm already gone for a few hours. I'm going to go dropped some balls out. Oh, yeah. Uh, because the automobile that I own. Really impossible, but now I know now that you've owned it for eight years.