That's why some people do it on a tape recorder or something. And then it's just. That's true. You know, writers do that a lot and things like that. Yeah, you're right. So, yeah, research shows that that's really beneficial. Okay. So I'm going to get all this started up for you. All right. One last thing for you to do. Three. Okay. She's going to start chatting with you. I'm going to put the doorbell back over here. So when she's done, you can press that button. She's having a little bit of a. All right. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I've been creating responsive people in the space since I was a kid. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people. And I'd love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yeah, I'm okay with it. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm okay. I'm okay. I guess. That's good. Where are you from originally? I'm from the United States. I'm basically an L.A. kind of guy. Cool. What are some things you really like about L.A.? You know, the weather. It's usually pretty sunny and temperate. I like the climate really a lot. I like the girls here. I like, let's see, I don't like the traffic. But I like the Hispanic population quite a bit. I like the girls. And I have a lot of friends here. So I guess, you know, I don't want to be anywhere else. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? Like I said, the traffic. You know, I was on the 405. You know, that's always kind of, you know, crummy. The cost of living. That's really, you know, terrible about L.A. It's always expensive. And, you know, I really don't like, I really don't like, you know, those things that are expensive. Like it just seems like L.A. is one of those places where, like, you know, you either have, like, you know, a ton of money and fame and fortune. Or, like, you know, you're down in the, you know, the ghettos, you know. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? I have. I've been to a couple places. You know, but very brief. You know. Mostly for school. I went to Arizona and New York and Montana. A lot of anthropology, like, you know, and archaeology, field trips and things like that. Nothing I'm doing right now. What do you enjoy about traveling? I like getting away from the city, you know. I was in Yosemite last year, you know, in the summer for vacation. That was kind of nice. You know, Yosemite was really, really neat to see. But, yeah. Just basically getting away from the city, I guess. You know, getting away from the job, getting away from the stress here. Yeah. What did you study at school? I actually studied political science and I also studied economics. I'm a big kind of political, you know, junkie, you know, to begin with. So I naturally kind of fell in line with that kind of field of study. Are you still working in that? I was. I was, but I lost my job. And, you know, that's kind of a bummer, you know. I lost it. It's already been maybe a year and a half from now. Maybe two years. And, you know, the economy got bad. The budget cuts got bad. And, you know, I wish I was working there again. Yeah. It can be tough to find a good job. I love my job. You could almost say it's virtually made for me. What's your dream job? Well, I wanted to be a lawyer at one time. I wanted to be a lawyer. And that's why I took political science and I took a double major in economics. And the sad thing is, the sad thing I regret is, you know, to get into law school, you have to take this entrance exam called the LSAT. And I studied for, like, really hardcore, you know, for about a year. And I took the test and like an idiot, I didn't feel right about that day. It was kind of an off day. And, you know, it's like, you know, the big game at the Super Bowl, you know, I just, I don't feel like I did well. And I canceled the test. And so, you know, I kind of regret that, you know. Tell me about it. Do you consider yourself shy or outgoing? I'm not really shy at all. I'm definitely not shy. But outgoing, I mean, I'm one of these people, I'm not flamboyant, you know. I talk to people. I don't mind talking to people. I don't mind meeting people. That's fine with me. But it's not like I'm, you know, dying to meet anybody, you know. Yeah. I see what you mean. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the 15 screen savers. Hey. I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. I guess. What do you do to relax? These days, you know, I play guitar. You know, I taught myself how to play guitar. Yeah, thank you. Thank you. You know, I should actually be doing more of it. But I also like to exercise. I'm on a diet right now, but my diet's been terrible. Eating habits have been terrible. But the exercise part is just great. I love to exercise. I love to run. That's one of them. One of my best things to do for stress is, like, run and, like, work out. I just wish that my eating habits were in line or a little bit better, you know. Okay. How are you at controlling your temper? My temper could be, you know, definitely improved a lot, you know. You know, a lot of times I feel I'm one of these introvert types of persons. When it comes to, like, you know, I don't mind being an extrovert or, like, meeting people and, like, having a good time, whatever. You know, when I'm mad, I really don't want to be, you know, talking to people. I don't like to yell. I don't like to scream. I don't like to hit. I don't like to fight. I kind of close down a lot. I just want to be left alone. Sometimes I tend to drag it on for longer than it should be, you know. The wife doesn't like it too much. And maybe I, you know, I just don't want to talk about it. I just don't want to deal with it. I kind of close down and shut, you know. Shut off for a little bit. Geez. You know, it doesn't happen too often. Maybe with my wife. You know, probably something silly. Who knows? Who knows? The thing, I mean, I don't have a lot of guilt. I don't do anything, like, to make me ever. Feel like, you know, that bad of a person, you know. There are things that, like, you know, I call minor sins. You know, I get white lies or whatever, you know. But, like, nothing, like, so atrocious that makes me feel, like, guilty. Can you give me an example of that? Let's see. I guess sometimes, you know, I'm a married guy. But, you know, sometimes there are times, you know, I like to. You know, smile at a girl or, like, you know, get a girl's attention. You know, I don't know. I never go. I never do anything about it. I never get the phone number or, like, you know. But sometimes I like to, like, talk to people, I guess. You know. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. Well, that's a good question. I guess. I guess. You know, I always handle it the same. I don't ever wish to ever change. I never want to, like, handle things differently. I always kind of, I'm pretty comfortable the way I handle things. You know, I think that I could be a lot worse than, like, you know, shouting and screaming and hitting and this and that. And that's just not me. You know, I think the best thing to do, you know, is kind of, like, get a lot of breathing room, a lot of space. And I don't wish for that to change or to handle any of that differently. I just don't basically know what else to do, you know. And, you know, the last thing I want to do is start talking about, you know, feelings or any of this, you know. That's the last thing I want to do. And so, like, I don't wish that I handle things like that differently in that way. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Well, you know, I'm pretty happy with my family right now. You know, also I'm married and we have a baby along the way. Which is good. Which is kind of nice. We have some cats. Thank you, thank you. We have cats and a dog. A weenie dog. And my mom, I love my mom dearly. She has diabetes, which, you know, she doesn't control. You know, she doesn't control it. And, like, it affects her health. And it always has me worried about her and, like, stressing out about her. And she could do so much to, like, prevent it and she doesn't. And, you know, I have a good relationship with my mom. I love her dearly. And I actually have a good relationship with everybody, I think. I think I have a ton of family and friends that get along with me pretty well, actually. You know? That's so good to hear. Yeah. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? There are times, I mean, it's pretty easy for me to go to sleep, actually. I feel like, you know, I sleep like a baby. The only problem I have, I think, is I feel like, you know, sometimes, like, you fall asleep and you have, you're just going to sleep and you kind of, like, jolt, you know, like, you almost kind of, like, fall. It's like a falling sensation or something like that. And it doesn't happen that often, but it happens. And, well, for the most part, you know, I sleep like a rock. I sleep really good. That's good. How have you been feeling lately? Well, right now, generally, I've been feeling worried. And anxious and, you know, and tense. And the reason why is because I said my mom, right, well, at least today, I found out my mom, she didn't tell me the whole story, and I'm kind of waiting until this is over so I can find out what's wrong with her. But, you know, I'm worried about her. She's in the doctors right now, so that doesn't tell me anything good. And, you know, I'm trying to find a job, so that has me worried, too. You know, the baby along the way. So that has me worried. So I feel, like, you know, overwhelmed with just a lot of, like, you know, things to do. And, like, a lot of my plate. And, like, a lot of it doesn't have anything to do with me, but I have to handle it. Like, you know, so, like, I guess. How do you cope with that? Well, I keep myself distracted. I keep myself busy. I feel like a busybody, you know. And the more, which kind of, you know, seems like it's not a good thing. Because I feel like I'm just. I'm adding more things on my plate. So, you know, like, one of the things I do is, like, exercise. And so I have to work out every day, you know. But that takes an hour. It takes an hour to, like, you know, change. And you just start running. And, like, go through the whole thing of stretching and cooling down. It takes some time. And then, like, to shower. All that kind of stuff takes time. But I have to do it daily. So I cope with it in that way. I also cope with it to, you know, playing guitar. But that's just more of a distraction. You know what I mean? Keeping, you know, keeping busy that way just seems like it's not. You know, working towards, you know, the goals, you know, that I need to do. Like, you know, finding a job, which I should be doing. But then, you know, it's one of those things where, like, I find, like, there's no good jobs. I've been looking and looking. And, like, sometimes when I do, it's just not what I want to do. It just doesn't seem like I want to, like, do any of these, like, terrible jobs. It's, you know. It's probably harder than I'm thinking about it. Because sometimes I feel like, you know, one of the things is, like, I feel like it is hard. But it's not. I mean, there are ways I can cope with it. You know, I just got to kind of. I kind of accepted it a lot. You know, I kind of internalized it. And, like, you know, it's not something that's, like, I'm not out on the streets or anything like that. You know, it is a worry. I've never been diagnosed with PTSD. I used to work with. No. Man. Ten years ago? I don't know. Let's see. The last time I was really happy, maybe. I mean, nothing. I feel like nothing makes me happy no more. You know, I learned a new song on the guitar. I feel, like, not even happy about that. You know, I feel like, you know, I work out. Sometimes that kind of makes me happy. You know, running, like, you know, fast and working out. But that doesn't make me so excited or anything like that. It just makes me feel good. You know, so I have these times where I'm just, you know, feeling good about myself. And I'm feeling, you know. But I'm never feeling great. I'm never feeling happy. I'm never feeling, like, so sensationalized. Like, you know, and, you know, incredible that, you know, it's just, you know, there's these mild times where there's a few good times, you know, and a few bad times. But the good times are never extremes. You know, never really good times. And never really, you know, atrocious bad times, you know. Okay. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? Well, I wish that his diet would work out. A little bit better, you know. But that's kind of hard, you know. Because I'm the kind of guy who just likes, you know, rice and, like, Mexican food and, like, you know, the snack. And I don't know. I just feel like that I could change. I wish I could change my eating habits. That way I can, like, you know. Because I work out so much. I feel like I do so much running and so much activity that, like, you know, that if I got my, you know, diet in check. You know, that would go a long way. I wish I also could change, you know, my, I guess my desire to, like, you know, get ahead. Like, right now I feel just so, like, the economy is so bad. And, like, things are so rough that, you know, it's, like, pointless to even, like, you know, look for these kind of jobs. So, like, it just seems like I just wish I had a little bit more inspiration. A lot more motivation to, like. To do things. Yeah. I see what you mean. Is there anything you regret? The one thing I regret is not, you know, this LSAT thing. You know, not canceling the test to begin with. Because I'm sure I could have gone into a school. But then again, like, you know, it has me thinking, like, do I really want to pay a bunch of, like, you know, law school tuition? And the cost of that? And, like, you know, just to, just to be piled on with more work and things like that? I don't know. It just doesn't seem like, like, I mean, there is this idea of justice and, and, and republicanism. And, you know, things that I really, you know, adhere to that I fall in love with and that I don't want to get away from. But it just seems like it's a, like, it's a ton of work and money. And, you know, it's just, it's a lot of work. And just to, like, for the small percentage of success that, that, you know, you might not be able to do in that kind of field. You might, you know, it just doesn't seem like, like, it's worth overcoming the obstacles I need to overcome. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Ugh. I have no idea. I would, 20 years ago, I would tell myself. Maybe, you know, I think I've done everything really well for myself. Except for the Elsa thing, you know, which I, I, you know, regret on one hand. And on the other hand, you know, I'm not sure if I regret because, like, about the bills and all that kind of stuff I told you about. And, you know, I think, you know, I've waited to get married. I've waited to have a kid. I've, I've, you know, pretty cautious about this. You know, I don't take drugs. I don't drink. I don't fight. I don't do any of these, like, things that, like, you know, that I think that. That real people have, you know. And they really, like, you know, ruin their life, you know. So, like, I'm pretty happy and content with being, you know, the cautious, you know. I don't know. Okay. How would your best friend have brought you? Oh, my best friend. I think he, he kind of, he likes me. He wishes that I would do more things with him. But he works at night. And, and, you know, it's one of those things I think most people, not just my best friend, but my wife, and maybe the rest of my family, feel that I don't put a lot of time and attention to them. I mean, they think that I'm pretty great when I do give them my time of day and my attention. But I don't know if I'm really there all the time, you know. I don't know if I'm really, you know, I'm always thinking about something else. I'm always thinking about something different. I don't know if I really can give them. I don't know if I'm really a real, you know, shoulder to cry on. Or, you know, if they ask for something, you know, I'll usually do it, you know. But I almost feel like it's like a chore. Like, you know, like if they, you know, if they really need me, then I'll do it, you know. If they're just asking for a favor, I almost feel, you know, I do it half, you know, with a lot of lackluster, a lot of half-heartedness. I just, and it's not because I hate them or anything. I don't really like them. It's just that I feel like I almost, I don't want to say I owe it to them. But the mere fact that I'm their friend. And makes them somehow, you know, like it makes me, you know, they rely on me, you know, at times. I don't want to let them down. They are my friends. But at the same time, I just feel like it's more, it's not, it's not, it's more of like a chore to do instead of a willingness. Like, oh my God, like I just want to help you. It's never like that. It's just something that I do because I kind of have to, you know. You got to, you know, got to do things for your friends, you know, in the end. Because it's. They're your friends, you know. And in the end, I do like them. And they probably would do it for me. And I, you know, so I just do these things, you know, just. What do you look proud of in your life? Well, there are a couple of things that I do like. That I feel good about myself, you know. You know, I ran the LA Marathon. That kind of felt good, you know. I've graduated from college. That kind of feels good. You know what I mean? You know what I mean? The thing is, I don't feel like that proud of myself for, you know, those things alone. Like, graduating from college, you know, hasn't really made me successful. You know what I mean? Running the marathon hasn't made me spin and trim. So, they're like half merits, you know. Where like they're great, you know. A lot of people maybe not have done it. A lot of people have excelled further. But, you know, they're kind of like stepping stones. Like, I feel no life long benefit from doing other than the fact that I can say that I've done. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Yeah, yeah. No problem. No problem. Thank you for your time, you know. I hope you enjoy, you know, being in this computer. Thank you. Goodbye. Oh, goodbye. I'm going to press this button now. I think we're good here. Okay, great. You can go ahead and drop that headset. Thank you. I'm going to go ahead and shut things down here. You can go ahead and have a seat right here. I think that kind of did it for me. Okay. You know, I'll be talking to myself. Yeah. I'm going to do a virtual team.