Okay, awesome. Thank you. Sure. Okay. So, how are you doing here? I'm doing great. Thank you for asking. You know, how about yourself? I'm great. Thank you. Oh, awesome. Where are you from and where are you from? I'm from Guatemala. My parents here, migrated here to the United States when I was like three years old. So, yeah. Really? Mm-hmm. Yeah, it's pretty cool, you know. How long have you been there? I haven't been there actually. I haven't been back to my hometown since forever. Why? Just, you know, I have all my family here, my mom, my dad, my cousins, aunts, uncles. So, practically I have my life here. So, I probably, I mean, it would be nice to visit, but, you know, just my curiosity hasn't, you know, gone there, I guess. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. What's your favorite part of Guatemala? I love the people. Everyone's nice. I love the diversity, you know. There's different types of people and the imaginations out there, you know. Everything's just great. You know, everyone's different, you know. No one's like the same, at least to some aspects. And I love the scenery. I love, you know, the mountains. They're beautiful. You know, great for health. They're great for hikes, you know, taking out, you know, the dog, the family, you know. It's nice. It's pretty active. Yeah. What are you thinking about the most? Ah, the smog. I don't like the smog. It's just, you know, if you go out, further out, you know, you could tell by the air, you know, or, you know, everything's clear, the sky's bluer. But other than that, like, you know, in traffic. Nobody likes traffic, I think. Yeah. But, yeah, that's, you know, pretty much. LA's pretty nice, you know. I like it. That's good. What did you study at school? Well, I was studying just basic, you know, I'm not sure exactly what I want to be. So, it's just kind of, you know, here and there, just jumping through hoops and stuff. Yeah. So, not really that yet. Still trying to find my interest, I suppose. What's your dream job? My dream job. Hmm. That's a good one. I love working with children. So, I would say probably a child psychologist, just because, you know, it's great, you know, to learn what's going on in the young minds and, you know, how we could help children develop a better way, you know, make children better. children, you know, or help, you know, help them, you know, grow up in a positive way, I suppose, instead of, like, going the wrong track. Yeah. I just, you know, help children. What do you think of yourself on a diet or on an outgoing? It depends. It depends on the situation I'm in. Sometimes, you know, I could be, like, super outgoing and just, like, you know. And sometimes I could, it just, I could be all quiet or whatnot and just paying attention, you know. But, I'm not sure. I'm not sure what it's like to be like, you know, if I'm, like, in class or whatever. I don't really, like, and there's everyone talking. I just, I prefer just to stay away from that, you know, because I need something else to concentrate on, something else. You know, there's, like, a moment in time for everything, I suppose. Yeah. Sometimes when I'm doing things, I can only say things that bring me joy. Hey, I know it's not polite, but it's the best I've got. What do you do around? Um, you know, I'm a little bit more of a, you know, a little bit more of a, you know, I like to kick my feet up on the couch and, like, read a good book, you know. Just get my mind going to another, you know, galaxy or universe or situation, you know. It's pretty fun, you know, just, you know, reading and then just having yourself relax and, you know, feeling good. That's great. Yeah, it is. It's just fun. I love reading. How are you doing in the morning? Um, I'm okay. What's the best thing you've done? I'm not, like, the best, you know, temper controlling person there is out there. You know, I try my best and I guess that's all I could do until I keep doing better eventually. But I'm not, like, the best. I mean, sometimes I do have my outbursts, you know. Um, but, you know, I guess that's everyone. I'm not sure. You know. When was the last time you had a hard time? Ah, huh. That's a good question. Um, hmm. I don't remember. Let's see. Honestly, I can't recall. Maybe, ah, my goodness. I don't know. Sometimes I'm very passive that I just like let things go because I mean, what's the point of making a big deal out of things? You know, so, um, huh. I don't know. I'm not sure. I'm not, I, I, I, I honestly, I can't tell you that at this moment. Sure. Yeah. Probably come back. Um, huh. Well, I guess when I was younger, I, you know, ah, could have been better older sister and I, I wasn't. And that makes me feel guilty for sure. You know, I could have been a better sister. I don't know. I mean, I could have been a better role model, you know, but I'm trying my best now, so I'm trying to make things better and it's working. Yeah. Tell me about your life or something that you would consider an important thing in Whoo. Um, I guess, huh. Hmm. I don't know. I mean, I'm the person I am because of the events that have happened in my life. So, um, I guess I'm not the person I am because of the events that have happened in my life. So if I erase something, then it's just, there's something of me in my present self or, you know, that would change. And I don't know, I'm pretty okay with the person that I am now. I mean, you know, I don't think I would change an event, you know, um, I'm okay with what, you know, ups and downs and goods and bad that has happened. Okay. Yeah. I'm sure you can tell them that too. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? I can't see your shoes, but, um, I don't travel a lot. Um, but I am kind of like an explorer, I guess. I love to explore, like even the smallest things. Like if I go hiking, I go off trail and, you know, just find my way up to the top, you know, somehow, some way and just make it, you know, um, traveling. Uh, I would love to do that, but I don't know. Just, you know, always circumstances in my life that doesn't, you know, always something, you know, I get married, children, you know, and all this. So it's kind of like, you know, it would be nice, I guess, you know, it would be nice. You know, I love camping. That's kind of like, you know, taking a few days trips out there camping and, you know, fishing. Yeah. Um, hmm. It was the same. It was, you know, almost summer, you know, me and my husband went camping and it was really nice. It was just me and him, you know, and it was like no one and it was like beautiful because it was just in the middle of the woods with a beautiful lake and, you know, it was, it was really nice. It was just, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It was. It was. It was really fun. It was like, I would love to do it again, you know, right now. It would be great, you know, just going out there. It's just, I love the adventure. I just, I'm just, I just. of things and the nature and just life and you know overall yeah uh it's it's easy but lately i haven't been able to sleep like at night right away because i don't know just you know just i'm laying there and i'm just like trying to go to sleep and i'm just like ah but eventually i do you know i just i probably like need to position myself in a different side of the bed like sometimes i'm in the headboard and i'm like oh i gotta go to the other side and once i position myself then i just like go to sleep you know but it just i gotta find the the right position for me yeah um i'm tired i get tired throughout the day you know but i kind of try to shake it off you know and just kind of like you feel like it's a new day you know and just try to make the day that i have as great as possible you know and then try to like make it up by sleeping at night the day of you know so yeah yeah yeah it's just you know it's okay i try to make it the best i guess if not then i just go to sleep throughout the day which sucks but yeah uh no no uh i've been feeling good yeah i've been feeling really good um you know a lot of things in my life have you know i'm having a really good year so far so i'm very happy with that you know everything's you know going good you know yeah it is it is except that i just got out of a cold and it was horrible but that's just nature my immune system has to work harder yeah um super happy was um when the doctor told me i was pregnant you know i was really really happy about that and i was just like oh you know that was really really good you know very excited and just reading about what's going on with my body and what's going on with the baby and oh that's very overwhelming and it's scary at the same time i've never really like uh you know but yeah i'm yeah very happy um i don't know um i guess just me myself i uh you know like you know i could you know just be myself and that's it you know just i can't really you know say i have a specific thing i guess i mean it depends on the person that meets me to tell me i can't really tell myself like oh i'm this i'm that you know just try to be my best and try to portray something good for other people to you know tell me or you know compliment me or whatnot yeah um and that's the thing i think um like i said i'm happy with the person i am right now and you know my flaws or whatever you know i might have i don't know whatever flaw people see in me and it's okay you know i'm okay with it whatever it's just i'm not gonna um i can't change myself for the likings of other people i have only one body and one life so yeah you yeah that's it um just my childhood with my sisters and my family but you know it's you know you learn from that you learn from the past and you kind of feel like hey you know maybe i should be a better role model you know for my children and so my children could be better role models so the world could just improve um um um um um and i am now more than ever happy you know and whatever hard things happen you know you're gonna get through eventually you know the only thing you can't um i don't know you can you know go back on his death you know you could you know a heartbreak or whatever but you know as long as i'm alive i'm i still gotta keep going yeah yeah i see thank you um i don't know um that's pretty huh most proud of i guess that i'm trying my best to be the best i could be and that's pretty powerful you know i i'm you know i try to be you know a better person each day and try to like you know improve myself every day as much as i can you know that would probably be something i'd be super proud of you know as much as i can very hard i'm not gonna lie um it is really hard you know because i can't say you know it's easy to be bad but it's hard to be good you know and you know it's always challenges and everything that goes you know you know it's always challenges and everything that goes you know in your life but you know it's just it's sometimes you know hard you know and sometimes it comes easy you know after a while you get a lot of practice and everything's just like you have a great day you didn't even try you know so yeah um you know loving friendly um outgoing you know adventures i guess i don't know that's what they say it's just you know that's them like you know but that's what at least what i try to be um you know at least i try to give the best foot forward always as much as possible you know even sometimes even if i'm having a rough day i'm just like oh you know you know i just i don't want to take it out on anyone or anything you know yeah um um um my ideal weekend usually i i like going to the park i like sitting down in like a tree under a tree actually under a tree where there's shade and just kind of like put my blanket out there have my dog and like read a book and you know sometimes if i don't have my dog like there's little squirrels running around and they like me to feed them so that's pretty neat you know just sitting there and just enjoying the air and the noise i guess because there's not silence you know you know the wind and the cars and you know it's just it's really neat yeah awesome thank you you're welcome bye fast you