Okay. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. I'm doing pretty okay. Thanks for asking. How are you? I'm from here in L.A. I grew up in the San Fernando Valley. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, well, I like, I like the diversity of people, the different kinds of food you can eat. I like, um, the outdoor opportunities. I grew up close to the hills, so I did a lot of hiking. Um, camping is pretty close by. I've gone snowboarding. Um, I like the familiarity. I think, you know, it's a big city and, uh, you know, I'm pretty familiar with having lived here for so long that I would say I like that too. Cool. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? Um, probably the number one thing I like about L.A. is that it's a great place to live. I think the number one thing that everybody says I don't like traffic. I don't like being stuck in traffic. I don't like, uh, the long commutes even, you know, for short distances. Um, and then, you know, it gets really hot in the summer at times. So, you know, that, I could stand it being a little slightly cooler when it gets to its peak, peak heat, but that's fine. Uh-huh. I love my job. You could almost say it's virtually made for me. What's your dream job? Wow, my dream job. Uh, that's a great question. I, I, I think my dream job would probably be, uh, you know, maybe being able to travel and somehow make money off of it, profit off of it, you know, make gainful employment off of traveling. But that's almost an unrealistic dream since I don't know if I would actually want to do that. But if, if I had to pick some kind of dream existence, you know, be in the movie theater, see, I can do anything I can. There's lots of other things. I just do whatever I can. It's not too difficult, but I would think having a home, I don't see the complete other side of that. so those kinds of things that do the job. it doesn't make me feel more comfortable than I used to. I don't know why I always get that comfortable. Like, you know, like, I think it's like, I, you know, like, you know, I'm a life traveler. I, uh, like, you know, like I enjoy travel, I like the familiarity of LA. There's also fun in discovering new things. So I think when I travel, that's what I like to do, just checking new things out. So I would like to be, you know, if I could make a living doing that, that would be great. I'd love to hear about one of your trips. One of my trips? Okay, well, let's see. The last trip I took, let me think of one. One more exciting trip. Well, my family is from Eastern Europe, so one of the trips I took with my parents when I was 14 was I went to Austria, Hungary, and Romania, and, you know, getting to see some of those old cats. I'd been a few times before, but it was when I was little, so I don't really have too much memory. Plus, I didn't really process things quite the same as when I was kind of more of age. So I got to see, you know, my family's old, you know, hometown. You know, we have a family. My family, like, tomb, so I got to see that. And just these old buildings and just a different way of life. I really like that, you know, seeing my parents' old friends, you know. And so that was pretty fun. It was very different. It was, like, really my first time being taken away from my home environment. You know, I left in the middle of the school year, so it was just, like, going from, you know, suburban America to traveling around, kind of, you know, taking these old trains and seeing these castles. And these old, like, hundreds of year old towns. And I don't know if it was for everyone, you know. I don't know. It would be great for everybody, but I really enjoyed it. Awesome. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the 15 screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? That's, that's a good question. I do, I probably, one of the things I do is either turn on, like, a rerun of a sitcom. I used to, I watch The Office a lot, so I kind of know when that's on, so I'll turn that on, you know, just kind of zone out a little bit to, you know, like, familiar characters and hearing jokes that are still funny for some reason. Or maybe, like, eating some kind of comfort food. You know, I try not to eat too much fast food at all, but, like, in and out of my home. I really like going there, so if I have to unwind, you know, once every few months, maybe I'll do that. Or I really like to read, especially, like, I'll read the day's events. You know, that really relaxes me for some reason, even if it's reading about something, some conflict going on somewhere in the world. I still, I'll read the headlines, and I really like to know what's going on. That kind of centers me, so I really enjoy that. That's something I do to relax. Uh-huh. How are you at controlling your temper? I would say I'm pretty great at it, although I think my nature makes that pretty easy. I don't get very upset easily at all, so it's not much of a challenge to control my temper. Yeah, I don't really have anger issues. It's difficult for me to get angry, so I don't really have much trouble with that at all. When was the last time you had a temper? When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? The last time I argued with somebody was probably... I don't even know. I mean, small disagreements, you know, I might have had with family or friends about things, but just a full-on argument, I can't even remember. It's been years. I don't really argue too much. I try to avoid conflict as much as possible in my personal life. I don't really see anything to be gained by it, and I kind of naturally repel away from it, so I don't... Sorry, I don't have much to say about arguing. Okay. What's something you feel guilty about? Something I feel guilty about? I would say that, you know, sometimes I don't really... I feel like maybe I haven't made the most of my potential yet. I think I could definitely do more, despite the fact that I work a lot. I feel like there's always more opportunity out there that we're missing. I feel like, you know, sometimes downtime, I feel a little bit guilty about that, because there's always something that I could be doing that I'm not, even if it's just putting away the laundry that I took out of the dryer that's been sitting there, or running late. I really don't like running late, although it happens more than I'd like to, and I don't know why I feel guilty about that. I don't like keeping people waiting, because it makes them feel like, you know, my time is somehow more valuable than theirs, which is obviously not true. I see what you mean. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Hmm. Okay. Nothing immediately comes to mind. Well, the last car accident I got into, it was a few years ago, I guess. I wish it hadn't have happened, not that I wish I could erase it from my memory, but I was driving in rush hour traffic, and I thought the cars in front of me were going, at least for a little, 10, 15 feet, but it turns out they had stopped. So it was a slow, slow car accident. And if that's what's going on, you know I'm not the only the person to blame. Oh, no! They didn't ask for anything beyond repairing the damages, but it was just horrible timing. So I wish that hadn't have happened. Yeah. That sucks. That sucks. It did suck. I'm over it now, but yeah, it does suck. Okay. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Well, I'm a pretty good sleeper, although I'm naturally wired to be up later at night. So unfortunately, my job allows me, affords me a pretty flexible schedule. But on the same token, I wish I were like hardwired to go to sleep earlier because I just, I wind up staying up till one or two every night and it's just too late. You know, even though I could get a full eight hours or whatnot of sleep, it's not always at nighttime. You know, half of my sleep is like in the kind of early daylight hours. I wish I were more able to sleep, you know, go to sleep at like 10 or 11 and then sleep and then wake up earlier as opposed to going to sleep later and waking up later. I've been pretty, feeling pretty good. I've been, I have no complaints physically and, you know, health-wise, I feel good. You know, my relationships with my family and friends are good. And everything is great so far. I have absolutely no, no real complaints as far as how I'm feeling about myself or anything like that. Have you had a study to use any of the behavior or thoughts you've used? No, no, I've been fairly consistent with my behavior and my thoughts. I think that everything has been pretty okay, pretty steady, no, no, nothing traumatic, nothing kind of resurfacing from the past, nothing of the sort. It's happened, there is happening. Okay. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. Is there anything you regret? Well, I think there's plenty of things everybody regrets. Yeah, yeah, there's plenty of things. In my life, yeah, like I said, I do regret, you know, maybe not trying harder in my younger days. You know, I, there's a period of time in my early 20s. I remember one of the things where I didn't work for a while. I just, I hung out with a lot of friends. You know, I guess it was like the proverbial bad crowd. You know, none of us work. We just, you know, we got high every day. Or it seemed like every day. I don't know. It was just, it was kind of like a throwaway period of my life. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? I would say that it's important to, you know, to engage with the world, I think. I think I kind of dropped out from the world a little bit. I think it's also, I would say that it's important to recognize the people around you for what they are, you know, and what kind of potential, you know, future activities you can expect from the people you surround yourself with. I think that I would say also that kind of try to focus on what I wanted to do with my life as opposed to just thinking, well, you know, things will work out, which eventually they do. But I think that, you know, there's a bit of lost time with that approach. It's kind of fatalistic. And I think that I would say, you know, just try to concentrate. You know, not everyone works on the same schedule in life as in a race. But I would say that it's important to have a goal in mind or some kind of, you know, idea for what you want out of life as opposed to just kind of waiting and thinking that things will fall into place. That makes sense. Tell me about a time when you said, you know, someone made you feel really badly about yourself. Well, I guess when people, I don't especially take even constructive criticism particularly well for some reason. I think that. At least for myself, I sort of have things figured out, although I'm sure I'm wrong about that. So I think just maybe in terms of like group work that I've done professionally or academically, you know, when some of my work is kind of picked apart or scrutinized, I don't deal well with that. And I take it more personally than I should. When was the last time that happened? It was probably about a year and a half ago. I was working on a research project at work. And somebody. It was three of us working on something. And then they brought in another pair of eyes just to go over it. And there was somebody just out of college, you know, went over what we had done. And, you know, it was just kind of rewording things. And it seemed just like cosmetic changes that were being made just for the sake of changing things. And I kind of took personal offense to that just because I thought I had a lot more experience and more education. And it was unnecessary. You know. I thought that the whole thing was a waste of time. And, you know, I just. I didn't think that she was somebody that was qualified to necessarily redo all our work. Or even to, not to redo it, but to edit it or to proofread, I guess. To make any kind of, you know, qualitative changes. I just thought that it was a really bad idea. And I thought that, you know, I shouldn't have viewed it this way. But I thought that. Yeah. I mean, I think that the fact that they brought in somebody with almost no experience, you know, was kind of like an affront to us who had worked on this project. But, you know, it wasn't our call. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Most memorable experiences? Well, I guess the first thing that comes to mind is one of my, the first real trip I took by my mom. I took the Amtrak to New Mexico. And I was out there exploring things for about ten days on my own. So that was kind of the longest period of time up until that point. And I was in my, I was, I don't know, 23 maybe at the time. That I had really just been on my own, completely cut off from everyone. I was in parts of New Mexico where there was no cell phone reception at the time. And it was very memorable because I was on it on my own. I felt like I was really, you know, extremely, you know, excited. Exposed to things I wouldn't have seen if I had had traveling companions. And it was a lot of fun. Nice. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Well, I've been very happy recently. I mean, I'm getting married in a few months. I got engaged on Labor Day in 2012. Thanks. So I was, that was a very happy day. This whole process, you know, of meeting someone and we kind of progressed very quickly. Realized, oh, I'm going to be a part of this. Recognized where we were. So I've been in a pretty happy state the past, well, it's been 11 months now. But yeah, so I think that the day we got engaged and we shared it with our family, I think those have been very happy times. New Year's was happy, you know. I'm in a happy period of my life right now, so, yeah. That's so good to hear. Yeah, thank you. What was your best time this past year? With a? Yeah. Sort of sets of humor that maybe not everybody gets, I'd say. Also, you know, helpful, calm, relaxed, maybe intelligent, you know, likes to recycle. I know that's something that they would say. I, what else? I think that my best friend might say that I like animals. I've always had dogs and cats, so they might describe me as a people person, I mean an animal person, excuse me. I also, you know, fairly easy going, you know, flexible with plans. What are you most proud of in your life? I'd say one of the most proud of in my life. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'm pretty proud of my family. Well, I'm pretty happy with the level of education I've gotten. I'm also going back and starting in the fall. I'm starting a PhD program so I'm happy about that. I'm happy about, you know, breaking some of my bad habits from the past. I'd say if I'm proud of anything, it's that. You know, I have a strong faith relationship. I go to church often. I'm very happy about that. I don't know if pride is the right word, but my relationships with my family and friends are all very good. I'd say maybe the fact that this is my mom. It's a lot different than, my life is a lot different than it was about 10 years ago. You know, the change, I'm happy and proud of that. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. No problem. Have a good day. Thank you. Goodbye. Goodbye. Alright.