me testy levels or anything? Actually, if you could just move around a little bit, our Xbox Connect is working. Oh, OK. Oh, did I get an avatar out of this one too? Yeah, you did. OK, now she's going to ask you some questions. And when she's done, she will let you know. OK. All right. Oh, cool. Thank you very much. Your answers are totally confident. Are you OK with this? Yes. OK. So, how are you doing today? Doing OK. Doing OK. That's good. Where are you from originally? North Carolina. Really? Yep. When did you move to LA? Almost four years ago. Wow. Why did you move to LA? I graduated college. I had an internship out here for a production company. So I started doing that with a group of friends and then got work after that and enjoyed the city so much and have been working out here since. Cool. How often do you go back to your hometown? Probably at the most three times a year, maybe twice, usually the holidays, maybe one random trip in there. That's good. How does it compare to LA? It's... LA is only now just starting to become home to me in the sense of that respect where going home was going home. Now going home is like going back to see my family and seeing some friends. But I feel more like I belong in Los Angeles than I do back at home. Uh-huh. What are some things you really like about LA? The food, the weather, goes without saying. I like the resources there. I like feeling. I like that the things that I want to do are much easier and much more accessible out here than they would be in North Carolina. So I feel like I'm able to pursue a lot of my passions and ambitions in a much more functional and realistic way living in Los Angeles than I am in North Carolina. What are some things you don't really like about LA? I mean, the cost of living isn't great, but sometimes, too, I always kind of tell people like part of the rent is having access to so many resources out here. So it's not even expensive to live in. is New York or Boston. So it's not the worst. But also, I mean, it is a little bit annoying that every time I do want to go home, it's a flight, not a drive. I can't really conceivably drive home for the holidays because it's about a three or four day adventure and just not practical. So it's unfortunate I'm so far away in that respect, but I can't really change geography. Yeah. What did you study at school? I studied history and media studies and production. Are you still working in that? Yes. I work as a freelance writer and producer. How did you decide to do that? In college, I realized I was pretty good at it and I knew there was a way to monetize that. And I came out here and worked a little bit in the public sector and trying to, you know, just doing those jobs that way and realized I could make more money, have more control over my schedule and my life and I did it freelance. So I've been doing it now for a little over a year now. That's great. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? I do. I love traveling. I try to go somewhere new for a good period of time about every seven to eight months to try to mix up things. So I was in Barcelona just recently and I'm planning on going to either Vietnam or even back to Europe in the next couple months. Awesome. What do you enjoy about traveling? I enjoy the break from routine. I think that while it's nice to wake up and kind of have an idea where your day is going after a few months you get very much kind of caught up in that and you pigeonhole, I guess, your thought process, your expectations for the day. I love going to a foreign country and just waking up and knowing that everything I do that day is going to be brand new and will be different than what I would be doing if I was in Los Angeles or in my own routine. So I'm a big fan of that. I love food, so it's great to just eat a lot of food that I love in the places where they were originally created. I'd love to hear about your trip. Yeah, sure. I went to Barcelona like I said a few months ago and that was mainly because I had a friend who was living there for six or seven months and she kept asking me to come out and I finally, I was at a point in work where I'd been working so much for months on end that I felt like I deserved a break so I went there for two weeks and yeah, it was one of the healthiest, smartest things I've done in a while. So it reminded me again how important it is for me at least to travel and to get out of the world. That's so good to hear. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? I'm very outgoing. I love talking to people and conversing. Even virtual people. Oop. I lost you. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense I turn on my phone and I'm like, I'm a fish pink screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? To relax, I listen and play music a lot. I like to read. I like to go see movies. I cook a lot so I enjoy cooking. My girlfriend and I are currently separated by distance so I haven't seen her in weeks and that can be very sad obviously. But I do enjoy it. I'll talk with her as much as I can. But yeah, it's just a pretty simple taste. Yep. I think I lost her. I didn't know if it was a mix up. I answered her question and she was like, are you shy or outgoing? I was like, I thought it was a direct response. That's okay. I'm a very quiet person. I don't really have much of a temper. So I'm very good I guess. I don't really get angry easily or quickly and when I do I'm usually aware of it enough that I can kind of formulate how I feel and why I'm feeling that way and what I want to be done about it. So it's pretty, you know, I guess I'm a pretty easy going guy in that respect. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? Honestly, it's probably something petty over like misremembering when something was done or like a date on something or like a fact. It probably wasn't anything emotionally fueled. And it was just about, yeah, I think it was probably about like trying to figure out when exactly we went to San Francisco. It wasn't an argument as much as just the other person, thinking the other person is misremembering. So in smaller, big situations it's very difficult for me to actually feel enraged I guess in the classical sense of the word. Okay. Tell me about a situation that you wish you had handled differently. I'm trying to think. I'm not one for regrets. I'm just trying to think. I just recently did a project, like a film, and the subject matter had a little bit to do with like an ex-girlfriend of mine. So when it came time to release it, I made a point. I didn't want to send it to her directly because I didn't want her to think that I was doing it to spun her face. But I did send it to her brother just because he enjoys my work and always says he wants to see stuff. And I, maybe that, she might have, could have misconstrued that as being passive aggressive. I don't know. But yeah, I mean, that's something I thought about. But I don't really regret it as much as like, maybe I could have just let everyone else who I wasn't necessarily sure about if I should have just stumbled upon it as opposed to me directing it to them. So, just my thoughts there. Yeah. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Hardest decision I've ever had to make. Ah. Um. It was actually probably, probably that, I don't know, it wasn't even a hard decision. Like I said, with that, the same ex-girlfriend I mentioned, it was probably hard because I knew I had to break up with her after some stuff happened. And it was difficult because I cared about her a great deal. But also, same to him, it wasn't hard to arrive at a conclusion that I had to break up with her. But at the same time, too, it was not the easiest thing to kind of go through. That process. It's getting on a roller coaster that you're very much aware of how terrible or frightening it's going to be. But you know you have to get on the roller coaster. So, yeah. I'd say that's probably a recent memory. What made you decide to do that? Ah. Just abundance of reasons that this person was probably not the best person for me. So, like I said, it was, I didn't have to weigh too much data to figure it out. It was a pretty clear sign. And I have no regrets about doing it now. I feel very strongly then about it. I still feel very strongly that I made the right choice now. Okay. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? It can be tough. There'll be, I feel like it's either if I've exhausted myself during the day between work and, you know, I've started exercising again, which is a huge help. But I'd say that it's, I kind of, when I get into bed, I never know how it's going to go sometimes. Sometimes I'll wake up within an hour of falling asleep and I can't go back to sleep. Or I'll just, yeah, periodically keep getting up and up. So, it's something that's gotten a little better in the last few weeks. But, yeah, like I said, especially having my current girlfriend not around, like I said, she's a very big source of comfort around. So, like that, but she travels a lot for work. So, it's something to have to adjust to. And sleep can be something that suffers from that. But in the same respect, I'm not someone who actually, I feel like I don't need too much sleep. If I can get four to six hours, I'm in good shape that day. How have you been feeling lately? A little anxious, I guess. A little more just, just whenever I get off of an assignment, there's always just the question, like, what am I, what's going on next? And so far I don't have the next project lined up. So, it's always that nervousness. In the past, something usually does come up. So, you have the precedent of it usually working out. But until it does, you're always a little anxious. And it can be depressing, because it's like a, you know, I've chosen very much a lifestyle that while I get to have a lot of control and autonomy over my life, it also is all on me in order to do it. Sometimes I'm very jealous of the idea of people just waking up, going to the office for eight hours, leaving, and not having to think about that work the minute they leave the office, and kind of having the momentum of a group of people or company carrying them through when it's a little tough. Whereas, like me, if I have an off day or if I'm a sick day, that no work gets done, you know. I'm a small business that has one employee. How do you cope with them? How do I cope with them? I assume you mean, I guess, people I work with. How do I cope with the maybe the better answer would be how do I cope with that lifestyle? I've gotten much more used to it. It's something I'm still learning and figuring out how to handle as far as, not just like how rewarding the work is when I do it, but also figuring out what's the most efficient way to live the life. What's the appropriate way to budget finances? What's the expectation I should have for myself in a given year? What's realistic? What's hopeful? That's something that I'm sure will take years and years to do, but I feel like as long as I'm getting better at it, then it's progress, right? Yes, definitely. I've done it once, and then probably if I would have gone back when I was gone in high school, probably it would have been the second time. But yeah, I've been diagnosed with depression once. I feel like it's one of those things that is something I have to keep in check throughout my entire life. I feel like I'm a pretty happy person for the most part, but as they, I hate knowing as it is, but like they say, people who are very creative or people who do a lot of stuff with their mind, it tends to fall out. And I get that. It's a self-esteem thing because it's so hard to feel or so easy. I should just be able to get in your own head about that. How long ago were you diagnosed? This was within a year. So I probably was feeling symptoms having been there before. It was kind of easy to figure out, you know, it's kind of happening again. So I'm feeling the symptoms again and going through those emotions and feeling like, okay, first I was kind of hoping it would be something I could kind of work through myself, but I realized it was just stupid for me to try to fight it. I didn't like the battle of my own, so I went and started seeing a therapist. What were your symptoms? Really bad. This was when I just couldn't sleep at all. I would get maybe an hour of sleep at night at best. I wasn't sleeping at all. I had just no drive to do anything, whether it was as simple as brushing my teeth or cleaning my apartment, things like that. And at the same time simultaneously being aware that it's like, oh, this is all in my head and it's not even like a symptom. So yeah, just a general malaise that comes with depression. Do you still go to therapy now? No, I just finished up since I didn't graduate or anything like that. But I got to a point where I felt like I kind of talked through as much as I could talk through and I moved on in other places in my life. It was kind of a good work, especially like I said, I was working on something I really cared about. I'm now with someone I care about greatly. And there's such a particular thing that I feel like I have a potential opportunity for me to not even have to worry about the symptoms and stuff as much now that I felt like therapy was not necessary. And also I just remember I have the time to do as much work goes on. Do you feel like there's a useful thing? Oh, definitely, yeah. I think having someone you can confide in who isn't your friend or your family member who will have a few drinks and tell someone what you said to them or anything like that is definitely something beneficial. I can't imagine how anyone couldn't benefit from having that on somewhat of a routine basis. Okay. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Um... I don't know. I'm a firm believer that all those things that can haunt you are also there for a reason. My sister died when I was about 12 years old and she was younger than me. And watching my parents, like seeing my father cry for the first time was a very kind of traumatic thing for me. And I felt like I grew up a lot that day. So it's so difficult to see that and see how my parents had to deal with losing a child. I don't want to forget those things because I think they are very integral to how I cope with life and how I perceive hardships and obstacles. And having that image of knowing my father and it's very humanizing because it's so easy to kind of kind of get away with it. And I think that's a really important thing. You idolize your parents. I still idolize my father but to know he's a guy like me and as I get older it's easier to identify with the man he is. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? So I'd be 16 or 6. I kind of like the notion that they always say you wouldn't worry as much what people thought about you if you realized how much people didn't think about you. I don't have the point of telling a 6 year old. But yeah, I feel like especially when you're in high school and so I guess, I mean nowadays we live in Los Angeles where so much is caught up in how people think about you. And I still am very, if I find out someone is upset with me or doesn't like me it bothers me to a great deal. I hate letting people down. So I would like to come to a healthier place where just knowing that sometimes you just can't really control how people feel about you even if you have the best intentions in the world. Right. What would you say are some of your best qualities? I'm a very compassionate guy. I'm there for my friends. I'm pretty selfless in that respect. I have a good humor about things. Even with being depressed or depression I can joke about it. I'm not a morbid depressed. I'm aware of when I'm low. And I treat it as such. And I don't try to deny it or try to like that. But I'm a pretty practical person in that respect. I don't think I'm a bad person. I think even when I'm depressed I don't take it out on people. People have told me they don't seem to when I mention that I've been going through depression no one seems to say, I for one feel like when I do go through it it's like everyone can just tell I'm just a smoking gun of sadness basically. But no, I tend to carry it pretty well. And I don't lose sight of the reality of what I know is happening. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. I was on my my girlfriend came she was in Thailand for three weeks and then she was supposed to go to Spain for two but she canceled that trip and came back and stayed with me for about ten days. Yeah, I know. I love her. She's great. She's the coolest person I know and so much fun. When she's around she makes me so happy. So having her for ten days and we just had like normal we rarely get normal couples times like it's always like oh I see you for five days and then one of us has to go somewhere. So to have ten days just normal where we could just cook dinner at home like lie in bed and read books that was great and it makes me so happy that I have someone that I can do that with and just feels so practical and feels so right. That's so good to hear. How would your best friend have grabbed you? I guess for, just to hear what I'm a good guy. I know I don't, I don't think I screw people over. I don't, I'm a good friend to have. I'm there for people. I look out for people. I care about people and what they think of me and it goes especially much for my friends and I try to make sure you know with a lot of my friends being on the east coast I try to carve out time to make sure that they know I think about them and I call them and so I feel like for a lot of people who count me as their friend I'm probably one of their better ones in the sense that I know how much I appreciate and respect the friendships we have. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thanks, Ellie. Goodbye. Bye. She wrapped up. Alright. Bye.