Hi. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask you a few questions to get started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confident. Are you OK with this? Yes. Pretty good. Alexandria, Virginia. I moved to L.A. end of 2001. Yeah, it's crazy. A couple times a year, usually, like for holidays. How does it compare to L.A.? Hmm. It is, it's very different. I think it's a lot more mellow. It's way more like suburbia. It's nice. There's something comforting about it, but it's always like I get a little restless when I'm there and look forward to coming back here where there's a little more action. Mm-hmm. Why did you move to L.A.? I went to grad school at USC. Cool. How easy was it for you to get used to living in L.A.? It wasn't bad. I mean, my program that I was in was so intense that, like, for the first year, it was so all-consuming that I really didn't have much spare time to think about the adjustment. It was just like... My life was not my own. So that made it kind of easier, I guess. And also, I was in a community of people that I went to school with, so automatically I knew people and made friends and stuff. So it wasn't bad. Uh-huh. What did you study at school? Film. How did you decide to do that? Hmm. I had an epiphany one day. Okay. I was out of undergrad. I was kind of floundering a little bit. I didn't really know what I wanted to do. And just one day, I kind of was like, you know, what am I really excited about? What am I really passionate about? And I realized that movies are the thing that I love the most and am most passionate about. So that is how I decided to go to film school. That's great. Are you still doing that? A little bit, yes and no. I'm in a little bit of a transitional period right now. But yeah, for the last several years, I've been producing, like a freelance producer. What's your dream job? That is so the question of the moment. I think that I don't necessarily have a job title that's my dream job, but I know sort of what I want. Because basically, like, I've been living a freelance lifestyle for a while. And I know that that is, like, exhausting and I don't want to do that anymore. So I'm looking for something that's stable, you know, full-time, nice benefits. And I definitely want to stay in the entertainment industry. And I like, you know, what I love about producing is that it's just, like, there's constant challenges. And you sort of never know what is going to get thrown at you. So that's, you know, it's always interesting and exciting. So I'm sort of trying to figure out right now what would be a good place for me to be where I can be reasonably challenged and, you know, have sort of a, like, room to grow and advance and all that. Yeah. Do you travel a lot? I can't see your shoes. I like to travel. I don't know that I haven't really been doing it a lot lately. But I have, you know, in the past done a fair amount. What do you enjoy about traveling? I love the adventure of it. Just, you know, new experiences, new places, new people. I think it's just good to sort of get out of your little insular world and see what's out there. And just, you know, see beautiful, remarkable places and things and just experience different ways of living in different languages and different cultures. I must be good about on your trip. Let's see. I went to Costa Rica a couple years ago. My, like, best friend from growing up, she and I went for, like, ten days. And it was, that's probably, that might be, like, my favorite trip of all time. It was really awesome. But Costa Rica is just, like, amazing and beautiful. And we just spent, like, we went to three different places and just did a lot of exploring and, like, sightseeing. We did a ton of hiking, which was amazing. And then, like, the last place where we ended up was this little beach town. So by that point, it was, like, we felt like, you know, we had done all this, like, amazing physical exertion, like, doing zip lines and all these hikes. So that by the time we got to the beach, it was, like... We've earned the right to just, like, kick back and relax and, you know. So it was just, it kind of, it hit all of the, you know, it, like, fed that sort of desire for adventure and activity. But it also, I'm also a big fan of vacations where you just, like, veg out and relax and, like, lie on a beach with a book. So it sort of hit everything. Awesome. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense... I turn on this big pink screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? What do I do to relax? I mean, depending where I am, like, if it's, you know, if I'm, like, at work or something and I'm stressed out, I just will, you know, kind of take a minute and just, like, breathe really deeply and try to just calm myself down that way. If I'm home, I might just, like, you know, throw on a movie or, like, a TV show that I really like and just that gives a sense of, like, sort of escape, release. Okay. How are you at controlling your temper? Pretty good. I don't, I mean, it takes a lot to get me very angry. It doesn't happen very often. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? Um, the last time I argued with someone was my mom and it was about money. How did you feel in that moment? Um, I felt really frustrated because I felt like she was, like, judging me unfairly and that was upsetting. That sucks. Yeah. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Um, it's good. Uh, you know, they live across the country from me, so I don't get to see them that often, but, like, I usually talk to my mom on the phone probably, like, once a week and my parents are really supportive. Um, they are, you know, like, when I go back home to visit, like, I enjoy hanging out with them. We have a good time. Um, so I'd say we have a pretty... Pretty good relationship. That's good. What's something you feel guilty about? Something I feel guilty about? Um... I guess because I'm, like, in this sort of job hunting phase, I feel guilty sometimes that I'm not, like, doing enough, you know? Like, there are times where, like, there are days where maybe, like, I should have... You know? Got a few more resumes or done more stuff. Like, I feel guilty sometimes for not being, like, productive enough. Thank you. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Um, usually it's pretty easy. The last couple weeks, like, has been uncharacteristically, like, not as good. Why? I'm not really sure. I haven't figured it out. But, um, I've just had more, uh, like, nights where it either takes me a really long time to go to sleep or I wake up in the middle of the night for no reason. Um, I've also been having a lot of, like, really weird, intense dreams that, like, I wake up sometimes. I wake myself up sometimes because I'm talking, which is weird. Um, so, yeah. It's just... I don't know. Um... Are you triggered by something? Not that I've been able to identify. I mean, I guess maybe I'm, like, more stressed than usual just because, like, my job situation is, like, in flux. But I don't know. There was no, like, event. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Cranky. I value good sleep. And I'm used to it. So it's just, yeah, it's not a good feeling. Feeling. I understand. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? Um... Not really. No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Yes. How long ago were you diagnosed? Um... Like... I think in, like, October or November. Although, this is actually... It's the second time it's happened in my life. But the first time was, like... Many, many years ago. What got you into health? Um... I felt like I was really low and, like, too low for me to get myself out of it. What were you thinking? Um... Just having a hard time functioning on the most basic level. Like, just... Getting up and taking a shower and, like, going to the grocery store and, you know, answering emails was just, like... It took so much energy. Um... So, yeah, I just... I wasn't really functioning normally. That sounds really hard. Yeah. Do you still go to therapy now? Yes. Do you feel like there's a useful... Yes. Um... Sometimes more than others. But, yeah, overall, I would say so. What sort of changes have you noticed in your therapy? I think that therapy is good for me because it... Helps me focus on... My sort of patterns. Um... And also, like... I... Just, like, observe... Observing how I am, like, responding to certain situations and just... I guess it's... It gives me a more heightened, like, kind of self-awareness. Um... So that as opposed to just, like, um... Kind of just reacting to situations. I'm, like... Just, like, noticing more what is going on. Um... And it just helps to... Um... I don't know. It's just helpful. I don't really know how to explain it. Okay. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Um... Um... I don't know. Um... I... It's... It's probably not good that I can't think of... I can't think of anything. Um... Maybe over, uh... Over Christmas, being at home with my family. Yeah. Can you tell me about that? Um... Well, it just was... That was, like... I was kind of, like, just starting to come out of my... Depression then. And, um... Like, you know, I live alone here. I have a dog. But, so... I just had a long period of... Feeling... Not... Great. And just... Sort of... Doing it all on my own. And kind of wishing that my family was around me. Um... So, when I was there with them, it just... Um... It just felt very, like... Safe and comfortable. And that just sort of, like... You know... Warm, familial embrace. Um... That's so good to hear. How would your best friend describe you? Um... I think she would describe me as... Funny. And smart. And... Um... A good listener. Non-judgmental. Um... I don't know. Is that enough? Hmm. Okay. Um... So... This happened... The last, like... Job that I had... I mean, I was... It wasn't... Technically, I was a freelancer. But I was working for this company for, like... A year and a half. Close to two years. And, uh... I had a... Very small company. Had a really good relationship with my boss. Um... And... He sort of... He sort of, out of nowhere... Uh... Told me that he was, like, downsizing, basically. And, um... Essentially, like... The arrangement that we had is that he paid me, like, a monthly retainer for my services. And then, on top of that, I would get paid fees per project. So, he, like, sat me down in this conversation and was like, you know... Our major client that is... Is, like, you know... The bread and butter of the company. They're, like... They're really cutting back. Like, you probably noticed things are getting really slow. And I was like, yeah. And he's like... So, I'm gonna... I'm gonna have to stop paying you your retainer. And this was a total surprise. But I was just like, okay. And he went on to talk about how he... I would still have the right of first refusal of all the projects that came through the door. And, you know, because of that, he made it seem like, you know... Even though I wouldn't be getting the retainer anymore... He would throw enough work at me still that, like... I wouldn't... You know, it wouldn't be, like, a dramatic decrease in the amount of money that I was making. Excuse me. But... And he was like, you know... This has nothing to do with the quality of your work. I love working with you. You're fantastic. Yada, yada. So, to make a long story short... What ended up happening is he was firing me. And he... That was his way of basically, like, phasing me out of the company and letting me go. Because from that point, he stopped calling me. He stopped emailing me. And later on, like, a couple of months down the road... I had to go back into the office. Because there were a couple of projects that were still ongoing. Like, the client took a really long time to get back with their notes. And when I was in there, I saw that... This guy who had worked with us a bunch. Kind of like... If we needed another producer. Like, if we were slammed. We would bring him on to do sort of additional stuff. He was doing my job. So, yeah. So, it just, like... It was a really shitty way to be, like, fired without being told that I was fired. And it was just, like... The reason I would, like... If I could, I would erase that from my mind. Is because I can't really think of another situation that made me feel so, like, angry and frustrated. And just, like... In a way that's, like... That still, even though this was, like, you know, several months ago... Feels very unresolved. And still makes me kind of, like, angry when I think about it. So, yeah. That was a very long explanation. But that's what I would. Thank you. What would you say of somebody in that colony? Let's see. I am a very loyal person. I am smart. I am organized. I... I... Very, like, caring. Kind. I am conscientious. And I work hard. Man. I think... To... Be more confident. And... Less passive. To really... To really... Like, focus on... What I want and the things that I know will make me happy. And to just go out and get them. As opposed to sitting back and waiting for opportunities to present themselves. What do you look proud of in your life? Hmm. Um... Um... Probably just some of the relationships that I've formed with people. Just, like, really, you know, deep friendships. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. You're welcome. Goodbye. Bye. Bye. Just, just, like, right before you walked in. Oh, okay, good. I was like, oh, no, we're done. Okay. Okay, good. Can I take this off? Yeah, you can take that off. Sorry. Okay. No problem.