I'm in the right spot. That's pretty good animation though. Speaker 2 Party hiring koyle Speaker 3 Hi, I'm colony, thanks for coming overweight. Yes. Yes. Good. It's been a nice day. The South Bay? Can I ask you that question too? Okay. That's where I'm from basically. Like the South Bay of it. Not much. I've been wanting to move anyways. Just to get a change up. Everybody. Thinks LA is like. Everything is the best. But it's too many people. And too much traffic. I can't see your shoes. Driving. And seeing new stuff. Last year I went to Sacramento. From here. And stayed out for like a month. Living in my VW bus with my wife. It was kind of cool. Camping. Nice. What made you decide to do that? Just wanted to have fun. Something different. What did you study at school? Art. Are you still doing that? No. A little bit. What's your dream job? Probably doing what you're doing. I'm really interested in coming up with new ideas and stuff too. Awesome. Awesome. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Outgoing. That's nice. And how are your friends doing? It helps me increase that. realmente. How long are you going to be at consumer Your first line it's the team. Six years now. That kid. Oh my god. I just looked like he's grown back. But that was a real problem for me emotionally. I argued with my brother last night, actually, about him talking to me with more respect as a person. I was mad and I wanted to fight. It's good, but sometimes they're just too caught up in what they're doing to pay attention to other people's feelings. Like with my brother, he's just tense because of his situation and he tried to brush it off on me. I was mad and I wanted to fight. What does something feel guilty about? Wasting money because I'm married now. Have you done anything to avoid it? Yeah, not doing it. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Something like probably taking some candy from the store. No, no. Taking money from my mom when I was like really young. Are you talking about that? Well, I was like, I was in junior high school and I think I took like 20 from her purse and bought candy for my friends. I felt guilty though like the same day. Has that gotten you in trouble? Probably, yeah. That was probably the beginning of my stupid activities. Has someone been a positive influence in your life? All my life or in the past couple years? What ever comes to mind? My wife. How do you know them? I'm married to her. We've known each other for about two years. I met her at an art walk. That's great. She actually went to USC too. Awesome. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? The past couple days has been kind of hard but I usually go to sleep good. What are you like when you don't sleep well? I think I'm kind of, I think I'm snappy. How do you feel like you're a good person? Positive, optimistic. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? Yeah. Like what? I've been thinking more positively lately and I want to put a lot of stuff into action so I've been trying to train my mind into knowing that stuff is going to come to me. Speaking to the universe. How hard is that? Easy. If you just try it and do it. Everybody's got a spirit. Okay. Have you ever been diagnosed with schizophrenia? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. Do you feel down? No. I just told you I feel positive. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. I was happy yesterday because I made a couple good decisions. Like what? Wanting to be positive and stay away from negative people. Okay. What do you look proud of in your life? Being alive. Knowing God. Mm-hmm. How would your best friend have grabbed you? I don't know. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? I don't know. I can't think of something right now. Okay. Tell me about a time when someone made you feel really bad about yourself. I don't think I can have one. What are some things that you wish you could change about yourself? Sex. Exercising. Waking up positive and having a good meal in the morning. That's good. What's one of your most memorable experiences? I think driving to Sacramento that time. Is that anything you regret? No. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Don't smoke cigarettes and watch how you spend your money. Are you going to sell my ideas and my thoughts? Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. I can't think of one right now. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Specifically, I've thought about zakres and for some kind of Dobbler 397 universe. There's a Korean school in DC that's awesome. I think it's true as well. eaterTom adulthood film would be awesome. Like stop recording your mulheres to her and go to her if you can. You don't need to ask meなんです . It's like more Vietnam. Tom, stop recording your w geese right now. And I said, I can't see you.