I saw my hair. You see what you look like and you're like, oh my god, I look dope. So this picture is not based on a real woman at all? No, they use, it's not based on an actual person. Okay. I'm doing okay. It's still morning, so. I'm from the East Coast, Massachusetts. Yes. When did you move to LA? I moved to LA when I was a child with my parents. Pretty much didn't have any choice in the matter. How often do you go back to your hometown? I haven't been back there. The last time I was back there was three years ago for Christmas. How does it compare to LA? LA is very hustle and bustle. There's a lot of people that are angry and a lot of people don't care about the other person here in LA. And which back east, the East Coast, the thought pattern is a lot different. You know your neighbors, you're friendly to your neighbors and to anybody that you see in the street. So, yeah. How easy was it for you to get used to living in LA? Well, since I was a kid, I was fairly young. At first it was rough. I was getting in trouble a little bit in school. But, yeah. After all that surpassed, I did fine in high school and stuff and even took some college courses. That's good. What are some things you really like about LA? Well, I love the beach and I love the mountains. I like to go hiking and I like walking along the beach. I just live a few blocks away from the beach so it's easy. Nice. I'm sure you have a lot of friends. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? No. Not at all. Why? Just not interested. I've been to Mexico a couple of times when I was younger. Went to Ensenada. But other than that, I'm not interested in leaving the United States, especially with what's been going on lately overseas. Okay. What did you study at school? I studied in the US. I was in the nursing program for a little bit but I had some problems at home which caused me to drop out. I'm sorry to hear that. That's all right. I love my job. You could almost say it's virtually made for me. What's your dream job? I don't have one. To be honest. I admire people that are doing the job that they love. I mean like football players. They love playing football and they get paid all that money. How great is that? Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? I'm pretty outgoing when I meet somebody. At first I might be a little bit reserved because we all, when we meet somebody, pass judgment as to if we want to continue communicating with the person or not. But once I've decided that I like that person or whatever, I talk a lot. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the 15 screensavers. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? I like watching movies. I used to like reading but lately my concentration level hasn't been so great so it's hard to get into a good book. How are you at controlling your temper? Not good at times. I have some outbursts every once in a while. It depends on how angry I get. When was the last time you argued with someone? What was it about? Yesterday. And it was with my partner. And actually to be honest, I don't remember what it was about. It's just sometimes people can have an ugly attitude. And I don't appreciate that. And if I feel that I'm being disrespected or whichever, I'm going to stand up for myself. Have you ever gotten in trouble? At times some people may be turned off from my personality because I'm very opinionated and I say what's on my mind. I do not purposely go and hurt people's feelings or anything of that nature. But I won't be bullied. And I won't be made. I won't back down if I feel like I'm being challenged. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. Last year my mother died. So I wish I handled that differently. Is it uncomfortable for you to talk about this? It upsets me. It upsets me. I'm sorry. It's okay. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Let me see. I think I'm going to pass on that one too because that will upset me more. Okay. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? That is terrible. Sometimes actually falling asleep may not be a problem. Especially when you're done working and doing everything that you have to do in a day. You're tired. But staying asleep is a whole different thing for me because it's like I can't. I get up and then I'm wide awake. I'll go out in the living room and turn on the TV and watch TV. I'm lucky if I get three to four hours of sleep. Are you triggered by something? Maybe because I do have a lot of my mind, you know, thinking about bills and the stressfulness of work and all this other stuff. So that's probably a big part of it. That sounds really hard. It's not difficult. It's just frustrating because when your mind goes on overtime mode, it just affects everything. Your concentration, your sleep, your eating. Everything. What are you like when you don't sleep well? I'm a little grouchy, especially in the morning. I'm not a morning person. I like the nights but I don't like the mornings. It's like leave me alone until I get my first cup of coffee. Other than that I'm okay. How have you been feeling lately? Well I've been depressed. I've been feeling a little bit ill. I've been feeling like I don't know how to deal with it. for quite some time and I'm still having difficulty because after my mother died four months later my uncle died so I had two deaths last year so I'm still reeling and trying to get myself back together I just recently I've started pursuing like interests that I used to do that I haven't done in a year because of what happened I just I might get angry a little easier I sleep a lot I eat I overeat I get tired very easily because I'm not getting much sleep so sometimes it's hard it seems like a risk case but I don't know what the trouble is but for now I just kind of I'm struggling to get through the day. Yes, I have a psychiatrist that prescribes me medication on a regular basis. Oh, I was diagnosed quite some time ago, probably 10 to 15 years ago, and it's just something I've never gotten over. I don't know whether or not you can, so I've always taken the medicine. What got you in this situation? I was arguing with everybody, my family, my friends, and stuff like that, and I was feeling desperate and hopeless, and I had attempted to take my own life years ago, which caused me to be hospitalized. And then they started treating me. I started seeing a therapist. So. Well, right now I'm not going to a therapist because my insurance, they'll cover the psychiatrist and not the therapist, but I am working with a friend of mine who knows some avenues to go to seek help for a therapist, and I don't know if that's really going to help me. I mean, it depends on what kind of therapist you get. Sometimes people just sit there, and they just listen to you talk and ramble on, and you're thinking, my God, what good is this? And the other type is the type that will give you some kind of feedback as to how to deal with the emotions, tools to help you deal with your emotions. So. Like I said, I haven't been going to therapy recently, just psychiatrists, just medication. Medication. Medication. Medication. Medication. Medication. I probably would be doing fine because I was doing great before my mom passed away. I was her caregiver. And even though a lot of times I felt overwhelmed or lacked patience with her, I still was a heck of a lot happier than I am now. So. Okay. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Um... I would say when my son was born, years ago. Do you find it easy to be a parent? I'm not a parent anymore. He passed away. So, um... And that was difficult as well. What would you say about your family? I'm extremely organized, extremely reliable. My work loves me. Because I get everything done that I'm supposed to get done. Even though sometimes I feel a little scatterbrained. And um... You know, those qualities are admirable in people that can keep their word and be responsible. Excuse me? Oh, I have lots of regrets. Things that I've done in the past that I'm not too happy about. But, um... You know, I met somebody once in my life that had have that saying and you see it on a bumper sticker... Lived to never regret. So, you know, you can't go back and make changes. It's too late. So I, you know... dwell on the situation. Sometimes it's a lot easier said than done. What advice would you give yourself, 10 or 20 years ago? Um... I'm not the advice kind of get-person. снова 更人 know I don't really give my friends any kind of advice I mean I find most of the times people don't listen to you anyway so why bother I just state my opinion that's all well right now I'm on a diet because of my overeating after my mom died I was a lot thinner when she was alive I just went crazy with the food and sleeping a lot you know sleep eat sleep eat and so now I'm kind of like on a diet trying to lose this weight and it's very unhealthy for me trying to think it's been a long time actually there's really nothing because now I just keep my mind busy I haven't been to a movie in ages I don't I used to go out shopping all the time I don't now so it's been it's been quite some time since I've been content and happy with Who I am and what I'm doing in my life right now my weekends like on Saturday I'm usually working on Sunday is usually cleanup day you know do your laundry clean up the house run some errands go shopping for food you know that kind of thing so it's not if I was younger you know it would be fun you know go out clubbing or whatever but I'm too old for that now what do you remember the most about your life? it's always the alumni that I like to talk to and I pardon them but there are you know there's nothing that I can think of there's nothing that I can be be proud of. What are some things that you do that you think are good news? A good comedy or whatever, I like to watch that. Sometimes my partner might do something stupid, which I like because I make fun of them. But that's it, you know, maybe go out for a walk on the beach. That's it. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. No problem, thank you. Goodbye. Bye. Does somebody talk for her or is she just talking to me really? I'll actually explain to you how she works once we're finished up with the study. Okay. Thank you. Do you want me to take this number off? Uh, yeah.