Okay. All right. Thanks. Yeah, go ahead. I'm okay. I grew up in Wisconsin, and I lived in Colorado for a bit, and then I lived in the United States for a bit. I lived overseas for a little while, and then I moved to California. Wow. Mm-hmm. When did you move to LA? I moved here at the end of June of last year, so I guess it's been, what, eight months, something like that. How often do you go back to your hometown? At the most, probably twice a year. How does it compare to LA? Well, my hometown is... Okay. All of 5,000 people, and there are a lot of cows and barns and farms, so the opposite of LA. Why did you move to LA? That's a good question. I have always wanted to live in California, but I had been living in the Central Coast, and I just have been coming down to LA. I've been living in LA once a month for different business and networking and personal development stuff, so, yeah, things were changing in Santa Cruz for me. The client I had, who was really the main financial source I had, that relationship ended, so I was totally free to move, and I thought, well, I guess I'll give LA a try and see what happens. So I gave it a shot, and here I am. How easy was it for you to move to LA? No, not at all. It's a very, very big city. I lived in Dublin in Ireland, which is also a big city, but, you know, European cities are much more condensed, and the public transportation is much more easy, and, yeah, so just getting around here and getting familiar with the city was pretty challenging, and, well. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes, I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? I love to travel. I love it. Yeah, I lived in Ireland, and I traveled. I was in Morocco, and I was in Costa Rica. I spent some time in Mexico, so, yeah. What do you enjoy about traveling? I love meeting new people, experiencing new things, new cultures, and, like, also not just seeing what's different, but seeing what's similar among people everywhere you go. I'd love to go, but when you're free. Sure. Well, I guess, hmm. I'm trying to think which was my favorite. I mean, there's amazing things about Morocco and Costa Rica both, but Morocco was incredible. It was, like, 12 days, and we went to three different locations. We went up in the Atlas Mountains, which are beautiful, and, yeah, it's a really, really cool culture. So it was fun. What's one of your most memorable experiences? My trip to Ireland. I actually visited there, which is why I decided to move there. So my most memorable moment of that trip, I mean, there's probably dozens, but, Yeah. I think my first most memorable moment of that trip was being on a bus and leaving Dublin and going just out into the countryside and seeing how absolutely breathtakingly beautiful it is. I mean, it's, everyone sees pictures of Ireland or, you know, you see it in films and it's green and lush and gorgeous, but you actually get there and experience it. It's, like, the pictures don't do it justice. So those are incredible. Awesome. Yeah. What did you study at school? I have an undergrad degree in English and psychology, and a psychology minor, and I have a master's degree in women's studies. Are you still working on that? No. I use my English and psychology. I work in marketing communications, so I actually do sales. So, yeah, the psychology definitely comes into play, and so does mine. I guess my undergrad degree in English, but really, like, I took that on and created something out of it because most people who get an English degree just teach, and I wasn't wanting to teach. Yeah. What made you decide to do that? Um, to, I guess I'm not clear on the question. Um. Let's come back to that later. Okay. I love my job. You can almost say it's virtually made for me. What's your dream job? Wow, um. You know, my dream job is being a motivational speaker and trainer and coach and traveling the world, doing that and impacting people's lives and really contributing to people. Okay. Tell me about your relationship with your family. That's good. How did you feel in that moment? Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fifth-pink screensaver. I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? To relax, I do a number of things. I like to do yoga, although I don't have the money for it right now. I love to dance. I love to read. I love to go to the ocean and spend time just staring at the waves and soaking up all those negative ions. That really recharges my battery, actually, probably more than anything else. I like to be with friends. I love art and trying new restaurants. Yeah, all those things are both relaxing. I guess they're relaxing in the sense that I feel connected to the people in my life and to the experiences of my life. So... Yeah. How are you at controlling your hunger? Depends. If I'm driving, not very good. But otherwise, I'm pretty good at it. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? Last time I argued with somebody... Probably would have to be... Oh, no, it was with the LA Times about the newspaper delivery. Yeah, that was the last time. Can you tell me about that? Yeah. The newspaper that was supposed to show up for the elderly lady that I take care of, it didn't show up. And I didn't realize that it wasn't there until late, I don't know, afternoon, I think, early afternoon. And then I called them, and they said, they said they couldn't send a replacement because it was after 10.30 in the morning, which was absurd to me when they made the mistake in the first place. So, I mean, for a service that, you know, we pay for it for every day. So, yeah, I was really irritated. And then I found out that the newspaper had been forwarded to a new address, and that had not been communicated with me. So, I was angry with the LA Times, I was angry with the people who had forwarded the newspaper and didn't tell me. Yeah, I was pretty frustrated. Yeah. Tell me about a situation that you would feel a general differently. Oh, wow. There are quite a few of those. Let me think about one. The other day I had a phone call, and I'm in a coaching program, and it was from one of the coaches in the program. And she was, you know, she was a little bit nervous. And she was explaining to me that there was an additional call that was going to be, we have meetings every week, classroom meetings, and then we also have coaching calls because we have one particular coach we work with. And then she called to tell me that I was going to have another coaching call with someone who's not my coach. And that hadn't been explained to me as part of the program. So, in that moment, it just seemed to me like, oh, my God, I have all these. People I have to be accountable to, and, like, I have to not just be accountable to them, but share private things that are happening in my life with these people. And it just was, I don't know. So, yeah, I wasn't angry. I was just, I just felt frustrated and a little overwhelmed in that moment. And, you know, and I talked it out with her. And we got through it. But, yeah, I could have certainly just been okay with whatever was being asked of me at that time. And it would have made the call go a lot smoother. Uh-huh. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. The hardest decision. Wow, there's been a few. I guess moving to Ireland was probably the hardest decision. No, it wasn't even the hardest decision. It was such an easy decision, actually. But telling my family about it was challenging. But the hardest decision was the first time that I moved away from my family. I was 28, and I decided to, I chose to move to Colorado. And that was a pretty tough decision. Because at that point, my family had been, you know, within an hour's drive of wherever I lived, an hour, hour and a half. And now they were going to be, you know, a 12-hour drive away or a plane ride away. So that was challenging. What made you decide to do that? Oh, lots of things. I loved Colorado. Colorado is a beautiful, beautiful place. It's a beautiful state. And the weather is so much better than Wisconsin. And at the time, I was very much into rock climbing. And there's just a huge outdoor community in Colorado. So there were a lot more people who were in my age group and were single. That was another factor. And were interested in the things I was interested in. So Colorado just seemed like a really natural fit. So, yeah. And then I found a job that I liked. The pay was atrocious. But I found some work that was really rewarding. And so it all came together. And I chose to move. That sounds like a great situation. Yeah. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Oh, that's totally unrelated question. Relatively easily. It just depends on like what time I go to sleep. If I'm out and I don't get home until 11 30, then I go to bed late. And I wake up feeling tired like I feel today. But generally, I can sleep through the night. I've had some pretty anxiety-ridden dreams the last couple of weeks. But even so, even when I wake up from those or if I, you know, stir from those, I still can fall back to sleep relatively easily. Are they trying to find something? Yeah, I'm sure they are. I mean, I'm in another transition state. I'm moving out of the house that I live in right now where I take care of an elderly woman. Yeah. And I just, I have to find something. I have to find the financial means to support me in doing that. And it's, she creates a lot of anxiety just in her state of being. She's exhausting and utterly depressing. So, yeah. How hard is that? Living with her is pretty hard. Like it's probably the hardest thing I've ever done. And I would never, ever choose to do it again. If I, honestly, if I knew what I was getting into, I don't think I would have said yes to the situation. Thank you. How have you been feeling lately? I feel trapped and helpless. Like there's, you know, nothing I can, there's no way out of the situation that I'm in. No matter what I do, it doesn't get any better. I don't, you know, I'm not getting any kind of work that I want to do. And my money's not working at all. So, yeah, it feels pretty crappy. Have you been diagnosed with depression? I have in the past, yeah. How long ago were you diagnosed? Oh, a long time. I was 15, I think, or 14. So it was over 20 years ago. What got you to be out? I was suicidal. Do you feel down? Oh, yeah, I feel down. Do you still go to therapy now? I don't, actually, no. Why did you stop? Well, I originally stopped with my therapist because we had completed, and we had worked on what needed to be worked on, and I was no longer depressed. And then I began therapy again later on. I think I was, it was in my early 30s. And then I, we ended that because I'd moved to Ireland. Do you feel like there's a need for it? Yeah, I mean, depending on the therapist and depending on your intention. Like, I don't go into therapy thinking, oh, I'm going to be in this therapeutic relationship for the next 10 years. I think that's ridiculous. Right. I think you go into therapy to work on a specific problem and have a solution and have somebody be your sounding board who can see things that you can't see. And then you go into therapy and, you know, work through that situation and come up with a strategy for not just that, not just creating a solution in that area, but also just creating strategies and tools for the rest of your life so that you don't have to be in therapy forever. Yeah. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Hmm. The last time I felt really happy? Wow. Huh. Wow, that's pretty sad. Um, it was at least a year ago. No, that's not true. It was when I, um, saw my biological mother, which was last May. And it was at the end of August. Yeah. Yeah. I'm very strong. I'm very strong-willed. I'm very supportive and loving and nurturing. I'm easy to be around. I'm intelligent. And, you know, I love trying to figure things out. Um... Yeah. Is there anything you regret? Anything I regret? I don't think so. No. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Don't take life too seriously. Tell me how you spend your ideal weekend. How my ideal weekend... I spend some time at the beach. I spend some time with friends. Either going out at night to a movie or just going out to a club or a bar. Somewhere that we can just sit and chat and be together. Maybe go dancing after. And Sundays I usually go to... And then I have brunch with friends and... Yeah, I go home and Sunday night I get ready for the next day. Okay. What do you look proud of in your life? I am most proud of... A few things. I've moved to places that I wanted to move to. So I've done things that have really spoken to me and have meant something. Been dear to my heart to actually... Achieve those... Goals or those... Yeah, I've done things that I wanted to do. Like move to Ireland and move to California. That's great. Mm-hmm. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Okay. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Sure. Goodbye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye, bye! Yesterday I went on an Eastern trip a couple of times just 하나 entre las dos... No, no, sí que sí, sí, sí, sí, avanzamos con la Premiería.