She'll ask you some stuff, but yeah, she's going to be here. Okay, great. So when she's done, she'll let me know. I'm going to put the doorbell over here. And hopefully it'll work. I'll try to sometimes put some of that in there. Okay. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confident. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? Pretty good. That's good. Where are you from originally? I grew up in Boston. Really? When did you move to LA? About 30 years ago. That's a long time. Yep. How often do you go back to your hometown? Not too often. Maybe once a year, sometimes less. I'm not sure. I'm not sure I'm sure. How does it compare to LA? Oh, I love living in LA. I don't ever want to live anywhere else. Why did you move to LA? Well, I came out here to go to college and I wanted to be far away from my parents and the weather was good and that's part of it. Okay. How easy was it for you to get used to living in LA? Very easy. Well, maybe somewhat easy. At the beginning, the first few weeks were really hard to just be in a new environment and to be away from everybody I knew. But after a few weeks, it was great. What did you study at school? Broadcast journalism. That sounds interesting. How did you decide to do that? Well, it's something I'd wanted to do since I was 12, and everything I did from the time I was 12 until I went to college was sort of in pursuit of that dream. Are you still working in that? Nope. Why? Well, it's kind of a long story, but I got laid off from my first job when I was in my 20s. And once I had done that work, I realized that's not really what I wanted to do. It was something I wanted to do. I was too cutthroat of a business, and it just really wasn't suited for me. It didn't make me happy. It can be tough to find a good job these days. Yep. What's your dream job? My dream job is working with football players and helping them recover from concussions and other injuries. Nice. How hard is that? Well, the work itself is not very hard. I'm very good at what I do. The hard part is finding a job. I'm very good at finding the right people and making the connections to work with them. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes, I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? I used to. I don't travel so much right now. What do you enjoy about traveling? I love seeing different places and different things. I love going to places that are not like where I'm from. Uh-huh. I love to hear about your trip. My favorite trip is I went to Australia for my 30th birthday. Wow. Because I wanted to lose my 30th birthday as I crossed the international date line. And I went to this really small place up on the west coast of Australia called Sharks Bay, where native dolphins live and swim. And it's very isolated for the most part. And I got to be there for a whole weekend just really just pretty much by myself with all these wild dolphins. And they come and they swim with you. And it's amazing. It's just a beautiful, beautiful spot in the world. Awesome. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? More shy. Why? Why? Hmm, that's a good question. Partly, the first thing I think of is because I've always been that way. But maybe that's an excuse. I don't know. I just prefer to be quiet and I'd rather be with fewer people than lots of people. So. Okay. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fifth-pick screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. Hi. What do you do to relax? I watch TV a lot. That's probably not the best alternative, but it is something I do. And I also walk on the beach because I live close to the beach. So that's one of my favorite things to relax. Uh-huh. How are you at controlling your temper? Pretty good. It depends on the situation, but most of the time I'm pretty good. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? Um, I don't think I tend to argue with people. I think I just get mad about situations, but not at people directly. Okay. What's something you feel guilty about? Hmm. I don't know if I feel guilty about anything at the moment. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. I'm not sure I have one at the moment. Okay. What are some things that make you really mad? Noise. Other people's noise makes me really mad. I live across the street from a bar. And these people are so rude and obnoxious and not considerate about their neighbors. That just makes me really mad. That's tough. Yeah. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Hmm. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I'm not sure. I didn't do anything. I don't know. I haven't written a record in 13 years. Uh, I have to say I have. I don't know. do that. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Pretty easy. I sleep pretty well. That's good. How have you been feeling lately? For the most part good. I'm just really worried about money at the moment so that's my biggest. So I can't say that I'm like great but it's because I am worried but you know I'm also confident that things are going to work out. That's good. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? Nope. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Nope. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Hmm. I don't know. I can't remember. I mean I don't feel super happy all the time but I don't feel unhappy either. Sort of like just an even. I don't know. I don't know. I don't feel happy either. Sort of like just an even. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoy. Well, I get to go to my friends work at the Motion Picture Academy so I get to see all the Oscar nominated movies. What are your favorite movies? She was there one night, so I really enjoyed catching up with her and seeing her again, so that was very pleasant. Nice. How would your best friend describe you? I think they would say reliable and loyal and considerate and thoughtful. Is there anything you regret? No. I really worked hard on that. I think there are lots of things maybe I would do differently, but there's nothing that really I regret. Next one. I'm sorry. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Well, I just think that there are things that, like it's not worth wasting the energy to think about things that I regret, so I don't have a lot of regrets about things. Okay. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? That's a good question. Don't worry about the small things. Don't worry about the small stuff, and save more money. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? Well, the normal things, like I'd lose more weight, and I would, I think, be a little more fearless maybe, be a little more bold. I think that's a good question. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. I don't think I have any of those. Okay. Tell me how you spend your ideal weekend. Well, I am self-employed, so I work all the time, so my ideal weekend is having lots of clients. That's good. That's something I enjoy. So that would be ideal at this point, my weekends, if I were really busy. What do you most proud of in your life? That I've really been able to take care of myself, and that I've done pretty much everything that I've said that I wanted to do. I've done that, and I don't have regrets about things. There's nothing really that I regret. I feel like I've done what I said I was going to do. That's great. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Yeah, that's not so great. Well, it's okay. Both my parents are deceased, and I have a sister and a brother. I feel closer to my family. I feel closer to my brother than my sister, but they both live on the East Coast, and I live in L.A., and then my sister has two girls, so I feel very close to my nieces, although we don't talk as much as we used to because they're teenagers, so they have other things on their mind. Who's been a positive influence in your life? Probably my teacher. The person I learned my holistic learning from. I really like to model my work and my way of being after him. He's a good role model for me, the way he holds his work and the way he lives his life. That's so good to hear. How close are you to them? We're pretty close. We're not best of friends, but I know that I can call him anytime I need him. Okay. What are some things that usually put you in a good mood? Put me in a good mood. Usually being with my friends or going out to dinner or, yeah, just spending time with my friends. Okay. What's your favorite thing about your life? I love it. I love being with my friends. I think I've asked everything I need to. Okay. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thanks. Goodbye. Bye. It worked again. All right, that was great. Thanks for being with me. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Okay, good. I'd like to hear that. So now I'm going to have you move over to the other computer. And you can do a quick post-survey about your...