All right. Thank you. Yes. Yes. I'm feeling okay. A little bit tired, but for the most part, feeling pretty good. That's good. Where are you from originally? I'm actually originally from Woodland Hills, which is out in the San Fernando Valley. I was born there. And then I moved to Lomita, which is in Los Angeles County, about probably around 1993. So, I mean, I'm 23 now. So, it's about, what, yeah, 19 years or so I've been living there. Yeah. What are some things you really like about LA? Some things that I really like? I would have to say, you know, the beach. You know, not so much the traffic. I don't really care for that. But definitely, you know, just kind of like the nightlife. You know, just people in general. I like conversing with others. So, yeah. Right. Yeah. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? Yeah, actually, I do. I mean, I can't see your shoes. But, yeah. Actually, I do travel a lot. I've been to places like Hawaii. Been to the Caribbean. I've been to, let's see, you know, just different places like Arizona. I've been to Oregon, Washington. Pretty much all over, I would say. But usually mainly like Hawaii, the Caribbean, Mexico as well. What do you enjoy about traveling? I think it's just the experience, you know. Like, you can't. You can kind of experience the culture, different people, you know. Just the whole background, the scenery. It's just, you know, it's something new to experience, I would say. Something that, you know, people haven't seen before. I'd love to hear about your trip. Well, let's see. I recently took a trip to Hawaii a couple months ago. That was back in December. It was around Christmas time, New Year's. So, that was pretty fun. We went to a couple different islands. We went to, let's see, I think it was Kauai. We went to Oahu. Maui. You know, places like that, so. Nice. Yep. What's one of your most memorable experiences? You know, I would have to say that, you know, probably like in Hawaii or like the Caribbean. You know, just like I said before, the whole experience factor. Just seeing, you know, new, different things. Things that are unique, so. Yeah. What did you study at school? I actually study journalism right now in my final semester. So, I'm about to graduate in a couple months. That's great. Yep. How did you decide to do that? Well, you know, it's kind of funny because, you know, I started off at a, you know, a two-year community college. And so, you know, I was going into like business management, something to do with, you know, I think basically accounting. But, you know, I kind of figured that wasn't for me. So, I decided to go into journalism because I couldn't, I mean, you know, I'd probably still be sitting at a desk. But, you know, at least with journalism, I can go out in the field. And, you know, talk to people. And, you know, kind of, you know, receive information, gather information, that sort of deal. And then, you know, write up stories. I just thought it was, you know, it was a lot more interesting for me as opposed to, you know, just kind of crunching numbers all day. So. Uh-huh. Yep. I love my job. You could almost say it's virtually made for me. What's your dream job? My dream job, I would have to say, you know, something in maybe radio broadcasting, sports broadcasting. You know, I think that would be really interesting. Something that's definitely a passion of mine. So. Okay. Tell me about your relationship with your family. My relationship with my family, it's pretty good. You know, I live with my parents still. Like I said, I'm 23 years old. You know, there's certain times when it can be a little bit shaky, a little bit rocky. But, for the most part, it's pretty good. You know, I've matured a lot in the last few years. So. Thank you. Things are, you know, getting back up to speed, I would say. Things are going pretty well. That's good. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? You know, I think it stems somewhere kind of in the middle. You know, sometimes I can be very outgoing and talkative to people when I'm relaxed and laid back. Other times, I kind of, it's not so much like I go into my shell. But, you know, at times, like I can be kind of shy if I don't know people as well. Or if I haven't. I've never met them before. So, it's one of those things that kind of, yeah, you kind of got to meet me in the middle with it. Because, you know, I can either be talk, very talkative. Or at times, you know, I can be a little bit shy. But, you know, once I get the conversation going, I'm fairly talkative. And so. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the 15 screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? You know, usually. I would listen to music. Or, you know, maybe just, you know, kind of go for a drive. Or, you know, hang out with my friends. You know, just something to, just to kind of, you know, ease that. You know, because, you know, like I said, sometimes you get a little bit, you know, tense. And you just want to relax. And, you know, just do the things that you enjoy. So. How are you at controlling your hunger? You know, I've actually been better with that a couple years back. You know. I. I. I've had, you know, there's points where, like, I pretty much couldn't control my temper, like whatsoever. I mean, I would just pretty much get angry at, you know, the littlest things. Everything would just kind of tick me off. But, you know, I've definitely learned to, you know, control that sort of thing. And you know, it's made me a better person because of it. When was the last time you argued with someone? What was it about? Well, let's see. I'm trying to think. It was probably something with my family. With my mother, maybe. It's. I. I can't remember off the top of my head. But. I can't remember off the top of my head. But, you know, it's always something so minuscule that that's why I probably don't remember it. But, you know, eventually we make up and I apologize for it because, you know, I accept that, you know, I'm wrong in certain circumstances. Yeah. What's something you feel guilty about? Something that I feel guilty about? Probably, you know, not being as nice to others as I could have been in the past. You know, I mean, that is the past. And, you know, I don't like to dwell on that sort of thing. But I think that's one thing that I've tried to work on. But it's also one thing that I kind of regret not doing. Just being nice. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Hardest decision I ever had to make? Pretty recent. Kind of tough because I actually have a buddy. He was in the Air Force and he recently got diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia. So that was really tough. And it's hard for me to talk to him because, you know, he's not really all there. He's not there anymore like he used to be. So it's one of those things where I feel like I'm kind of ignoring him. And I don't want to do that. But at the same time, I don't know his tendencies. He could be a little, you know, crazy. So probably like, you know, some sort of like traumatic stress disorder. Maybe when he was in the military. So I don't know. But yeah. Yeah. That sounds really hard. Yeah, it's pretty tough, you know, because we go way back. I've been best friends with him since I was probably about five, six years old. So it's just, yeah, it's just really hard to deal with. But, you know, I try to, I don't, you know, try to keep in the back of my mind. But, you know, it's always there. I don't ever forget. So, yeah. How would your best friend describe you? My best friend? Well, he'd probably say that, you know, I'm a pretty down-to-earth guy. Usually pretty honest. Sometimes brutally honest. But, you know, I try to work on that too. He'd probably say that I'm pretty funny. I like to hang out, you know, just kind of do things here and there, you know. Just normal activities like any other person, you know. Go to the beach, hang out, watch movies, you know, grab a few beers, that sort of deal. So, yeah. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? You know, it varies. Sometimes it's easier than others. You know, if I'm really tired, you know. I'll probably have a very good sleep. I haven't been sleeping all that great the last few days because, you know, my house, there's workers on the roof. So you're putting in the new roofing. So that's kind of tough. So that always wakes me up early in the morning. So sometimes a little bit crabby. But for the most part, I usually get a pretty good sleep. Okay. How have you been feeling lately? Lately? Eh, been feeling pretty good, you know, because, you know, things are starting to look up. I actually got an internship about a month ago. For, you know, my field of journalism. So that's good. I've had to graduate in two months. So I'm looking forward to that. I'm starting to make a little bit more money. That's, you know, that's good. And yeah, things are just going pretty well right now. I can't complain. That sounds like a great situation. Yeah, it's not bad, you know. Like I said, it could always be worse, right? But you know, I'm enjoying life. So that's the best part. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? I have not. No. Have you been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you ever been in a hospital? Have you ever been in a hospital? No. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Last time I felt really happy? Man. You know, it was probably going back to my buddy when, you know, he was still, still had his sanity, I guess you could say. You know, he came back to visit from the Air Force. He had some leave. So, you know, we were just hanging out, you know, just kicking back, having a few beers. And just talking about life. So that was nice. But I missed that, you know. So. How did you feel in that moment? I felt great, you know. Because there's nothing like having a best friend. You can have conversation, you know, 24-7 about anything. You can tell anything to him in confidence. And you can tell me anything in confidence. Like, that's hard to find, you know. Especially someone that you've known for so many years. And then you can't really get it back now. So, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There's probably one or two things that I regret. Well, I mean, I got a DUI about three or four years ago. Actually, it was four years ago. So that's something that I definitely regret. Because, you know, I look back on it and, you know, things might have been different. But at the same time, you have to accept, you know, the actions, you know, circumstances that took place. So, you know, I manned up. And, you know, I guess I think I'm better off with my life now. And I guess I'm better off with my life now. But at the same time, you know, it's always going to be in the back of my mind. Like I said, it's just one of those things that you have to deal with in your own way. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Well, you know, it's one of those things. Like, I was a child then. So, I really don't know what to say. I mean, even if I would have listened then. Who knows? But, you know, I probably would have told myself, you know, just be careful. You know, make sure you can be the best person that you possibly can be. You know, I'm not a person that's always going to be a little bit more confident. You know, if I see someone, I know I'm not going to be dumb. And so, you know, if somebody holds you inst vais you don't want to go. Go for them. Just let them know if they succeed in it. Like, God bless . You know, I'm a coach for other healthy situations. I don't know how you guys are doing. I'm just kind of in the middle. You know? How much do you spend your ideal weekend? What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? Tell me about a time when someone made you feel really bad about yourself. What would you say about a time when someone made you feel really bad about yourself? Okay. What would you say about a time when someone made you feel really bad about yourself? What would you say about some of your best qualities? That's good. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. That I really enjoyed? You know, it was probably over at my internship. I wrote a story or two, and it just felt good to get those stories done, and eventually they're going to go into the paper. So I feel accomplished about that. It's one of those things when you work at something, and then you see the product right there. It's right in your face, and you can tell yourself, you know, like, I did that. So it makes me feel good. What would you do without? You know, just... Let's see. A few different stories. It just usually thinks about... Well, the paper's in Long Beach, so it's usually about, you know, stories or events that are taking place in Long Beach. So, you know. What are you most proud of in your life? I would say that I'm most proud of, you know, graduating high school, about to graduate college. Hopefully, you know, obviously I'm going to earn a degree, and then hopefully get a, you know, a good, solid job, you know, in the near future. I think that's one thing that I'm most proud of. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thank you. Goodbye. .