put it okay cool there I am all right thank you so much Rachel sure fine I'm doing all right yeah from Maryland yeah from Maryland Washington DC area like five weeks ago Maryland you it's a lot it's a lot less it's not as nice this time of year it's more it's it's good it's nice it's LA is a lot better though it's a lot it's a lot more people a lot more going on I guess I'm still getting used to it so um it's it's not like yeah I'm still getting used to it it's coming slowly but but surely I live in Culver City I do I have one it's okay it's I live in a really nasty house it's cheap it's cheap because I'm living in a friend's place and but but and he's letting me stay there for half price but the the actual like place itself is pretty horrible living conditions but I'm moving soon so I'm sure you can tell them I'm not much of a world explorer but I'm moving soon so so you can tell them I'm not much of a world explorer but I'm really excited to be in those is AC cravings travel a lot it's it's just not every country of my life right like uh it's kind of like it's a weird situation like I wish I didn't know about it was oh it's exactly Yeah I would say I'd probably travel more than most people in the US like considering considering that most people don't travel in the US, but I wouldn't call myself a world traveler or anything. What do you enjoy about traveling? I enjoy the chance to get to, like, see other walks of life and kind of, like, meditate on the specificity of my own, you know, the, given the parameters that I grew up under, like, how different everyone else is, like, how every life is totally, I mean, even just within the US, like, seeing how someone in California grows up is so different from how someone in Maryland grows up. And then to think about someone in, like, Thailand or something growing up, it's pretty, it's pretty amazing. Mm-hmm. I think, I'd love to hear about one of your books. Uh, okay. Um, hmm. Putting me on the spot here, Ellie. Um, let's see. Uh, well, um, I, it's been a while since I've been on a trip. I guess one of the last trips I did was to, um, I mean, a lot, like, two years ago I went on a road trip. I went on a road trip across the US, and that was, that was pretty amazing. I saw, I guess the best, the best two places on the road, I drove from Maryland to LA. This is before I actually moved out here. But, um, I, I visited New Orleans, and New Orleans was just this whole, like, even though it's part of the US, it's like a totally, it's totally different than anywhere else. It's so, um, unique, the culture there is so unique, and, and the blend of, like, Caribbean and French and all that. And, and all these other influences into, like, the American South is so, so, um, uh, incredible. Yeah, it's just, it's, it's, yeah, it's unreal. Yeah. Hmm. It's a tough question. Um, what, um. I, uh. Hmm. Hmm. You know, I, I. You, can you come back to that question? Are you capable of that? Yeah. Come back to it. Yeah. That's what I'm just saying. Film. How did you decide to do that? You know, that's actually a question I've been asking myself. I knew, I know, I, my entire life I've had, like, phases of interest. So, when I was, like, very, very, very young, I was really into, like, the first phase that, that I remember was keys and then tools. Like, I would go around collecting keys. And then I'd go around collecting tools. Like, just every sort of tool. I had a toolbox. My parents have told me that I had a phase before that with, which was balls. Like, various balls. Um. And then I was really into, like, insects. Collecting insects and reptiles. And, and, like, animals. And then the dinosaur phase. And, and, and at a certain point I got really into, um. Like, like, music. Like, first rap. And then, uh, guitar. And then acting. And then at some point in there I, I, I remember telling someone that right now I'm interested in playwriting and, and poetry. But eventually I was going to be interested in, in, uh, film. Like, I, I could kind of see the trajectory coming. But I don't remember what led me to that conclusion. I think I just always, I led a sheltered life. Uh, as far as movies are concerned. I didn't, my parents didn't let me see an R-rated movie until I was, like, in high school almost. Like, um. And, uh. And I never, uh. So I never saw an R-rated movie. I was also very squeamish. Like, I remember when I was fairly young. Maybe, like, six. I saw Star Wars. The first scene of Star Wars. Darth Vader, like, breaks a guy's neck. It's just a little scene. Very, very, very beginning. And that, like, freaked me out. And I had to leave the room. So, I'm not really sure, uh. Yeah, it's, it's, it's. Um, I, I'm not exactly sure how I got into film. But, uh, I've always been fascinated by, like, how people interact. And what, like, you know, acting and stuff. And movies in general. I am, yes. You could almost say it's virtually made for me. What's your dream job? Um, to be a filmmaker. To be able to direct. And, uh, put, put together. And, like, I guess, direct. I don't use that word so much. Because I think, I think of it more as, like, I want the opportunity to put together and make movies. Uh, or to make movies. It's probably the best way to do it. Uh. To say it. Because I want, you know, I want involvement in all the, all the processes. But. I guess the best parable for that would be a director. Director. Okay. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Well, it's a lot better when I'm not living with them. Um. My. I guess, um. It's funny you should ask, Ellie. Um. I've been thinking about it a lot lately. I think I'm close, in my entire family, I'm closest with my dad. Um. I get along with my brother and sister. You know, like, but I don't. Went away. Like, my brother's in a foreign country right now. So I don't have the opportunity to talk with him. But, like, I spend more time talking to my dad than anyone else. Because I feel like he's the most, like. Of all my family, he's the one who most accepts me. And, like. Um. Thinks positively. Thinks positively about me. Um. So it's. I have, like, a. A complicated relationship with my parents. I mean, my family in general. Mm-hmm. Do you consider yourself a guy or outgoing? Well, on the Myers-Briggs personality test, I'm, uh. I'm an extrovert. But, like, since moving. But I'm not, like. Like. I'm not. I probably would consider myself on the scheme of extroversion. Or on the scale of extroversion. Sorry. I would consider myself extremely introverted. I just. I see other extroverts. And just no matter who they're around, they're able to, like, strike up conversations. And I'm. I'm a fairly shy person. I'm sort of, like. Uh. Or inhibited person, maybe. Um. So I like to, like. Like. Until. Yeah. But I'm working on it. I'm working on it. Okay. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fifth and screen saver. Hey. I know it's not Hawaii. But it's the best I've got. Because. What do you do when you're around? Um. Well, in the past, I would smoke weed. But I've quit smoking weed. So now. I. You know. Have a glass of wine. And. Maybe watch a movie. I don't have. Or maybe go. Like. Depending if it's like an. If it's. Um. If it's a worn out. Sort of. Stress. Like. Like. Then I. That's what I do. But if it's a more, like. Anxious type stress. I might. Go on a. An intense walk. Don't really exercise that much. But I like. You know. Competitive sports. And hiking. Yeah. How are you controlling your hunger? Pretty good. When was the last time you argued with someone? And what was it about? Well, I always liked arguing. Um. I wouldn't call arguing necessarily losing my temper. Um. I. I enjoy. Uh. A vicious debate. Um. But I don't. As long as my. Like. Cause I won't like. Revert to personal. You know. Attacks. Um. In my. In my arguments. I try to keep it on subject. Um. And try to explain myself as best I can. Which can get frustrating. Cause I'm not like the best. Articulator of what I think. Um. One of my weaker points. I would say. But um. But the last time I had a. A heated debate. I think that. Was that the question? Um. Um. Um. What happened? I forget. I forget the question that I had a heated debate. Um. Last time I had a heated debate. Was. Um. I had a heated debate about. Uh. The movie Boogie Nights. Um. I. I. I didn't lose my temper exactly. but I get like very extremely passionate about, about, cause I, I don't think it's like that good of a movie, but the two people who I was, I was arguing with were saying that it was like one of the like best, um, best movies. Why did they think it was the best movie? Um, they think that like there's some, there's some sort of, as I understand it, they have, um, they have a certain, uh, they think that the, like all of the stories within Boogie Nights, they have their own, um, like each of them could be their own separate stories. They just think that there's a whole like complexity of character within the movie and, um, that somehow like, uh, um, what, what were they saying? They were saying like the movie, it's like, it's like the end of an era, which makes it kind of like casino. And there's this attention to detail of, of, of the, in the different character, like how they, how they interact in the plot, um, kind of like, uh, um, yeah, I guess I think the heated debate became about like that. So from there, and like, personally, I, it's not like a bad movie or anything, but it's the, um, I just don't think Dirk Diggler is like that, like me meaningful of a character. Like I, I guess the way I come out, I came out of the movie cause I had seen it before many years ago. And I, my opinion of it is basically the same, even though like, I remember like in watching it again, I was able to reevaluate it. Um, um, there's nothing bad about the movie. There's nothing like articulable about that. It's like, it's good, solid acting. You know, the directing is good. The camera moves are cool. Um, the, you know, it's cool. It's, but, but it's me, for me, it was like meaningless. And then to, and then they were, that led us to discuss, cause the movie that I saw recently that I really did like was Django Unchained. And they both saw that movie and they hated that movie. And then there was this extreme, I guess the heated part of the conversation came up. And I was like, oh, I don't know what to do about like, so in the movie Django Unchained, um, you have Django and Django's like a kind of, he's a two dimensional character, but I don't think that that necessarily takes away from what the, the big, the big purpose of the movie is. And, um, and you have Dr. King Schultz, who's this, uh, who's this like his mentor character. And the person I was arguing with was saying that he was intelligent. And, uh, so, and because he was intelligent, there's no way he would have, he would have, he would have, he would have, he would have, he would have, he would have risked his life to save Django or like would have gone into this like second act where they go and they go to this, uh, uh, plantation to, to save Django's wife, et cetera. And, um, and the re the, the reason for her giving that argument, which like either you buy that he would do that or he wouldn't. But the reason for her argument is that an intelligent person would not sacrifice themselves for someone else. Um, which, which strikes me as so like, um, like who, uh, like she, she, her, her basic argument was that like altruism doesn't exist. It was a very Ayn Rand type argument. Altruism doesn't exist. Um, the only, the only thing you can do is like, the only thing people do is serve themselves. Um, so it's not quite Ayn Rand, but it's like the only thing, like all people are out to serve themselves, which I'm not arguing that like every decision has like a mix of altruism in and stuff. Like even the most altruistic type decision, there's maybe like kernels of self, self-interest in there, but she made it sound like self-interest was the only motivating factor in, and, and like what, but what, how, how horrible is your life if that's like what your ultimate, um, per, like if you, if you can't like love and sacrifice for other people. So it led it to an extremely, uh, passionate debate. Um, and, uh, so much like, yeah, and it's, so, um, so yeah, that, that, I guess that's the, I don't think I necessarily like lost my temper. Um, I think of losing my temper as being more, um, like I just, I, I would just revert to, um, ad hominem like attacks. Uh, but I, I didn't like, that's not, um, maybe I was like, maybe I was criticizing her worldview, but I wasn't like, well, you're an idiot. You know, like it wasn't, it didn't, it didn't turn into abuse of any sort. Yeah. I'm glad you understand. Um, um, um, I don't know if I necessarily would want to erase anything from my memory. I would say an issue that I have is not being able to remember in as much detail as I would like. I remember feelings and moments, not stories. Um, like my life doesn't always sync together into like a coherent story. It's like this moment and that moment and this moment and that moment. So, yeah. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever made. the hardest decision I've ever had to make. Oh, geez. Could it just be one of the hardest decisions? Hmm. Choosing between two things that it's like, I guess I'm having a hard time recalling a moment where I had to choose between two options. There's no Sophie's Choice type moment in my life. But I do think that the decision, because I lived in New York for a while, I went to school in New York, and the decision to leave New York after having lived there for five years was very, very difficult. But I had to do it for, for money reasons, and because all of my, all of my core group of friends were either, like, most of them were leaving and going other places in the world. And then the one other person I was close to was living with someone who I did not get along with at all. So it was like this situation where I didn't, I was either going to live with people who I wasn't as close with, or Craigslist, or move home. And I think it was a tough decision to leave. In fact, it was so tough that the only way I could do it, I had to justify it by saying that I would be moving back to New York within, like, a month or two. Which wasn't, which didn't end up happening, but that was the only way that I could leave New York. How hard was that? Or how hard is, how hard was that? It was hard. Um, it was, it was, yeah, it was, it was just a very, like, isolating, because also, like, I had fallen, like, previously to that time, I had fallen in love with one of my, like, closest, another one of my close, very close friends. And, uh, that had kind of gone extremely badly. And so I wasn't on speaking terms with her, and I couldn't, like, that whole, everyone on my list of friends who was, like, closer to her, it was, it wasn't quite, like, a her-me type thing, but that, that was the way that I kind of saw it at the time, so I didn't, like, you know, just being socially isolated, et cetera. Yeah. Well, recently, it's been awful. I, uh, I, like, so the last, last night, I slept for, like, ten and a half hours, um, which seems to be the length of time that I have to sleep in order to have really vivid dreams. But previous to that night, so last, not last night, but the night before last, and the night before that, I got four hours and two hours of sleep, um, because I was working on set, and I would get back, and either, and I just, like, couldn't fall asleep for whatever, whatever reason. It's, um, too much riled up energy or something. I don't know. Tired. Uh, very, not immediately. I guess initially upon waking up, like, I really enjoy being up in the early morning, and, um, I also stopped drinking caffeine. Like, I, I've had, like, a little bit of caffeine, like, coffee the last two days, but before the last two days, I hadn't had any coffee in, like, three and a half weeks. So, um, I guess with, with caffeine in my system, I'm ready to, I'm ready to go. Um, without caffeine, it's, I'm just, I'm just quieter, I guess. More introverted. Since, like, lately, it's, it's been a little bit more of a change in my thoughts. Yeah, I mean, I guess when, having just moved here, there was a period of time, like, at the beginning, where the, the sheer difficulty of finding a job and finding people to, because I moved here, because I have a group of friends here, or a couple of friends, but I don't have, like, a large number of friends. And the, the push to, to get out there and meet people and find a job and that sort of pressure is pretty, um, overwhelming at first. And I think that I'm slowly, like, coming to terms with that, um, and moving, you know, moving past it. I, I, but not necessarily, you know, like, it's still, it's still there. The pressure is there, but I'm just, you know. You, you know, you know. No, I just, nope. The last time I felt really happy, might have to reach back. Um, I think the last time I felt really happy was, uh, during the writing process of, so last year I shot a movie, um, co-wrote, co-directed, co-produced, um, and that was kind of, like, that, it still consumes my life, but, um, but I think that during the writing stages of that movie, in which we would, like, get up, eat breakfast, bunker down, work really hard, put stuff up on the thing, just, like, pure creative, energy, um, between me and the person writing it, and, and there's, like, probably, like, a day that I remember where it's just, I remember going to bed, and I was just so thrilled to be working on what I was working on, and, and, and working with the person I was working with, and, like, just, like, I felt like, yeah, I guess that was the, the last time, that was, that was, like, more than a year ago, though, but I guess it's hard to, hard to think that I haven't been really, truly happy since then, but when you're making a movie, like, you don't, you can't allow yourself to be happy, especially if you're doing it, you know, basically by yourself, with, with, like, you can't, like, you can't, too much else to do, so. What would you say about being in a comedy? I would say that I'm very, except, like, accepting of other people, and always, I'm very, empathic, and, and, and, and, and, open, like, excited about new ideas, and open to new ideas, and, and, yeah. Okay. What are some things you would be concerned about, in your life? Hmm. Um, I guess I wish I was less, uh, uh, less ruled by fear, more, more fearless, in my, you know, everyday, my interactions, and in my, like, um, you know, zest for, for living. Um, yeah, I, I, other things I would change about myself, I, I would, I don't know. Um, tell me about a time when someone made you feel really bad about yourself. Um, I think there are numerous instances in my childhood in which my, like, uh, like, every single time there was an issue at school or some sort of, um, some sort of, uh, like, every single time there was an issue at school or some sort of, um, conflict with a teacher or anything. My parents were always, always on the other side of the court. You know, like, never, it was, I, I noticed, or noticed as I got older that other people, other parents were, like, if their kid was in trouble, like, there was something wrong with, with, like, their kid was perfect, there was something wrong with other people. But my parents were, it was always the opposite. Um, and particularly my mom. So I would say that there are a couple of instances, um, in which, um, I was, like, blamed or, like, you know, it was my, it was my fault, um, when, when what I was doing, like, yeah, it's just things, things that I couldn't, like, there's no, yeah, I don't know. That sounds really hard. Yeah. What advice would you give yourself to someone who's, like, 10 years ago? 10 years ago. Um, stay, stay, you know, like, I, I think that there's, um, I have a tendency to, like, I love, I love the fact that I have a tendency to get really caught up in an idea, in an idea and, like, devote myself entirely to it. But sometimes, um, I, I think that, ideas are too easily, I would just say, like, do as much as possible. Like, don't, don't decide that you, um, are only going to do one thing. Um, try to, like, I guess I would have taken up, like, some, taken piano. Learn, learn to read music would be a big thing for me. Learn to play the drums would have been, drums more than reading music. I would say I'd love to play the drums. I would love to learn how to play the drums and maybe done more, like, acting classes. Um, as far as, like, because I was always really into directing, so I was always directing actors and stuff, but I didn't, it's only now that I, um, I don't know. I guess, stay, uh, don't, stay, stay, yeah, I don't know. That's a tough, tough, tough question, Ellie. Okay. I think I've answered everything you asked me. That's it? Okay. Thank you for sharing your thoughts with me. Sure. Goodbye. Goodbye. Bye. All right. I'm going to stop the recording, and we can do everything together. Okay. So, um,