Okay, thanks. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? Okay. That's good. Where are you from originally? From Santa Monica. Really? What are some things you really like about LA? The people, mostly. What are some things you don't really like about LA? Well, the people, also. I see what you mean. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? No, not a lot. Why? Well, I can't afford to travel as much as I'd like to. Okay. What did you study at school? I was an English major. Okay. That sounds interesting. How did you decide to do that? I just liked reading a lot at the time. So, it sounded like the best thing, well, the most fun thing to study. Are you still doing that? No, not anymore. I love my job. You could almost say it's virtually made for me. What's your dream job? I guess my dream job would be to... Yes. manage a soccer club. It would be pretty much impossible for me. I don't have any experience in that field. I'm very shy. I turn on the fish tank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? I play music. What do you do when you're annoyed? What do I do when I'm annoyed? I don't know. What do I do when I'm annoyed? I can't think of anything. I don't know. I don't do anything specifically. How are you at controlling your temper? Pretty good. I would say very good. I don't lose my temper very often. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? When was the last time I argued with someone? I can't remember. I don't have a lot of conflicts with people. I can't remember the last time I argued with someone. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Well, let's see. When I was a little kid, I was outside my grandparents' restaurant, and I was in a restaurant. And there was a robbery, and I saw it. Well, I saw it when the robbers were leaving. Yeah, maybe I would want to erase that from my memory if I could. Yeah. How did you feel in that moment? Well, I didn't know what was happening in that moment, so I didn't feel so bad at the time. But I felt bad afterward because then, you know, my mother was upset. My mother was there, and she had to call the police, and it was disturbing to see her, you know, really disturbed that way. But at the time that it actually happened, I wasn't really upset. It was more the aftermath of it. Yeah. That sounds really hard. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. A situation that... Hmm. I don't know. I don't know. Well, I can think of a... There's probably a million situations that I wish I would have handled differently. I can't think of one in particular. Maybe... I think that when I was a kid, I... I... I don't know. Well, I think that when I was... Let's see. Oh, I have... Okay, I have a good one. I didn't marry the girl that I think that I should have married. So that's a big one for me. Yeah. Can you tell me about that? Yeah. Well, we were together for about four years. And I think I just took her for granted and I just didn't commit. And that was a long time ago. And now that it's been so many years, I realize... Well, I don't know if it's a realization, but I think now that... That, yeah, she should have been my wife. That we were... That we were... We were made for each other. Or made for each other. But because my selfishness and because I just had this fear of commitment at the time, I just felt like I didn't... I didn't do what I should have done, what the smart thing would have been. What's something you feel guilty about? Well, the last thing I can think of... that I would say I feel guilty about was... was... You know, I feel a lot of guilt about my friendships. I'm not... I don't feel like I'm as good of a friend as I could be. But then at the same time, I don't really know exactly what... how I could be a better friend. I just feel a little guilty. That I'm not... I can't help people. Anyone who has a problem, I can't. I never feel like I can help anyone who I know who has a problem. So... When was the last time that happened? Oh, that happens every day. I guess that happens with everyone who I know. And everyone... All of my relatives and all of my friends, I don't feel like I can really give them anything or help them in their lives. You know? Mm-hmm. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Well, they're... It's very distant. It's just... It's very cordial and it's very... I don't know what the word is. It's on the... It's kept at a very surface level. I don't think that they know... I don't think that my family really knows me very well at all. And I don't know them very well either. Not in a true sense. So... Yeah, it's... I think a lot of families are that way, but it is... It does bother me that mine is that way. Yeah. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Oh, it's very easy. I sleep a lot and I... Yeah, I have no problem sleeping at all. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? No, not really. I would say... The way I am now, it's the way I think I've been my whole life. So... Even when I was a little kid, I slept a lot also. And... No, I don't think I've changed much. How have you been sleeping lately? I've been feeling lately. I'm pretty down. But like I said... In a way I could say, yeah, I'm feeling really down. But then again... I've always been this way, so... It's hard to say that it's down when it's consistently that way. Yeah. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Yes. How long ago were you diagnosed? Oh, a long time ago. I was... I think about 10 years old. Around there. What got you to seek help? I was just missing a lot of school. I didn't want to go to school. So eventually they sent me to a therapist and then to a psychologist and then to a psychiatrist. And it went from there. Do you still go to therapy now? No, I haven't gone to therapy since I was a teenager. Why did you stop? I don't know. Well, I didn't feel it was helping me at all. So one day I just decided I didn't want to go anymore. How has seeing a therapist affected you? Well, like I said, I didn't feel that it helped me. So I guess I don't know that it affected me much. Do you have disturbing thoughts? No. No, I wouldn't say disturbing. No. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Well, I feel pretty happy whenever I see my nephew. And I have a... My best friend's children are... I feel like they're my nephew and my niece. And I'm pretty happy when I'm around them. That's great. Tell me how you spend your ideal weekend. My ideal weekend would be... I would probably be traveling. I would really enjoy just getting out of the city every weekend. Going anywhere really, just anywhere out of the city. What do you enjoy about traveling? Just seeing the way different people live and how people are different wherever you go. I really do think people are different when you go to different places and how they interact with you and how they see the world. Different food. And I also like historical places. I'm into history and I enjoy just visiting anywhere that has some sort of historical significance. Awesome. I'd love to hear about your trips. I haven't taken a trip in a long time. The last trip I really took was... I went to France a few years ago for a wedding. And I had a really good time there. I had always wanted to go to Paris and so I got to go to Paris and then I went to a little town that's a few hours away from Paris where the actual wedding was. And... And yeah, it was really fun. I think the church where the wedding was was like a thousand years old. Wow. Yeah, it was a really cool trip. What's one of your most memorable experiences? I don't know. I don't know what would be considered memorable. Whatever comes to your mind. A memorable experience. Probably the most memorable experience I guess would just be... Nothing in particular but living with a girl who I told you earlier that I think now that we should have gotten married. That's something that stays in my memory. That's why I'm saying it's memorable. Because it's still with me and it's something that I don't think, you know... Well, I know I'll never forget it. But it's not any particular day or any particular moment, you know. Yeah. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? Well, a lot. I wish I could be healthier. For one thing. More energetic and more friendly. Well, I think I am pretty friendly. But more outgoing, more social. Those two things mainly I guess. I would like to be more social, more enthusiastic and healthier. How would your best friend describe you? That's a good question. My best friend. How would my best friend describe me? I think... I think he would say that I'm a very... Well, it sounds cheesy but he would probably say that I'm a very spiritual person. And that I'm very giving. I think I'm a lot more selfish than people think I am. But people think that I'm not selfish. And probably he would say that I'm creative also. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Well, my advice to myself? I don't understand the question. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. Is there anything you regret? Yeah, but we already talked about it. Right. What are you most proud of in your life? No, I can't... Well, I don't think that I really believe in being proud or in pride. I don't think that accomplishments are really something to be proud of. But I can't really think of... any accomplishment anyway, even if I did have something to be proud of. I can't think of any sort of accomplishment I've had. Okay. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Something I did recently that I really enjoyed. Well, I sang karaoke with a couple of friends of mine. And I don't usually do that, but yeah, that was a lot of fun a few days ago. Cool. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thank you. Goodbye. It was more difficult than I thought it was going to be. She just kind of had me stumped a lot of the time. I think I got better after a little while. At first I thought, oh, they're going to get mad because I'm not saying anything and I don't know how to answer. I appreciate you coming in. You can actually take your headset off now. I'm not going to go like this.