You did a good job on that. All right. All right. All right. When she's done, she'll let you know, and you can press this button to let me know. Okay, cool. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I've been created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people, and would love to learn about you. I'll ask you a few questions, get started. And please feel free to call me anytime. Your answers are a complete comfort. Are you okay with this? Sure. Okay. Thank you. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing fine. That's good. Where are you from originally? I'm from Columbia, South Carolina. Really? Yep. When did you first go in? 2004. That's a long time. Yep. How often do you go back to your hometown? Once a year for Christmas break. That's good. How does it compare to a life? A lot slower paced. What is the life? I wanted to pursue a film degree, or I'm sorry, a film career. Are you still doing that? Yes. How hard is it? It's pretty challenging, but it's fun. What made you decide to do that? I've always had an interest in film and movies, so it seemed like a natural pick for me. Cool. How easy was it for you to get used to living in LA? It took about a couple of years, but I feel like I'm pretty used to it now. What are some things you really like about LA? I like that it doesn't snow. It's warm weather. There's lots to do with a lot of beaches. What are some things you don't really like about LA? The traffic and the cost of living is pretty high. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? I've never been outside of the US, but I would love to at some point. What's your favorite movie? I love the movie. What's your favorite movie? Do you consider yourself a guy or outgoing? It depends on the situation. I can either be introverted or extroverted, just given the right circumstance. Sometimes when I'm doing things, I put on this big green favor. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? I like listening to music, doing crossword puzzles. I enjoy doing crossword puzzles. Reading and hanging out with friends on weekends. How are you at controlling your temper? Very good. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? I don't think it was an argument. Maybe a difference of opinion, so it was more like a debate. It was pretty tame. Can you tell me about that? Yes. I think it was a debate over sports, over a basketball game. I was talking on Facebook with somebody about it. I think it's good to express yourself if you have a difference of opinion. It's natural to not always agree on things. I think talking about it is healthy. Tell me about your favorite movie. I like the movie. Tell me about your relationship with your family. I have a very good relationship with my family. I get along with all of my family members and extended cousins and aunts and uncles. There's no one that I've ever had any riffs with. Okay. Tell me about a situation that you would feel a little differently. Hmm. With my family? Yes. I think I would have been more disciplined growing up and more disciplined with schoolwork and homework and that kind of thing. But for the most part, I had a good childhood and there's not much I would change about it. Okay. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Hmm. Probably leaving my comfort zone in South Carolina and moving out here. That was pretty hard, but at the same time, it was exciting. So it was a bittersweet feeling. A lot of excitement mixed with some anxiety, but it went away pretty quickly. Are you happy with your life? Sure. Okay. What's something you feel guilty about? Not doing better in school when I was in high school. Have you done anything to avoid it? Definitely. I could have been a more diligent worker and I could have applied myself a little bit better. What's some of the positive influences on your life? Hmm. Okay. I've always had a strong family support system and parents and siblings. So that's definitely a positive thing. Uh-huh. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Hmm. An event. Uh. Probably going back to school. I wish I would have done better in school. So if I could take something back from my past, it would be scholastically related. Okay. How easy is it for you to get a good next week? It's pretty easy. That's good. What are you like when you don't sleep well? When I don't sleep well, um, I tend to be kind of lackadaisical and just tired throughout the day. Kind of groggy. Okay. Have you had a thing that's easier or more comfortable? No. Everything's pretty much the way it usually is with me. How do you enjoy your time off? I've been feeling pretty good. That's good. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? Uh, no I have not. Have you been diagnosed with a symptom? Uh, no I haven't. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. The last time I felt really happy, um, I made a lot of money, uh, a few weeks ago and, uh, I feel like I'm ahead of the game with, you know, with having rent and, you know, under control and a lot of bills out here, so I'm still kind of having the lingering effects from that happiness. That's great. Yeah. Can you say a little more about that? Uh, when I, when I have money I tend to be a lot, uh, more even-tempered. Not even-tempered, but I tend to feel better about things and more optimistic. And this city being such about your finances, it always makes me feel good to be ahead of the game. And to have, uh, just have sources of income. Yeah. What would you say to a community about quality? Uh, I think I'm creative and I think I'm a good listener. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years from now? Hmm. To be as disciplined and focused as possible. But, you know, I'm not a person who's always focused. I'm a person who's always focused. Because once you're out of your parents' homes and out of their lives, you have to depend on yourself. And the better, the better you do in school and the better you are, um, uh, as far as discipline's concerned, the more pleasure, pleasurable your life will be. And a lot, uh, your life will be a lot easier. Hmm. What are some things you would recommend about yourself? Hmm. Let's see here. I wish I was more disciplined. But I'm working on that. And I've gotten a lot better at that. How hard is that? It's become pretty easy. I think I'm just getting older. Um, I'm out of my 20s now. So, uh, I've definitely seen a change from when I first came out here. Tell me about a time when someone made you feel really good. What was it like moving out here without yourself? Hmm. Um. . . Some people tend to say that my decision to move out here was, uh, not feasible and kind of a pipe dream. So that kind of made me feel bad. But, uh, I kind of take insults in stride. And, um, sometimes I welcome constructive criticism. Because some, some things are wrong with you that you're not aware of. So as long as it's not mean-spirited and it's coming from the right place, I think it could be an invaluable, uh, tool. You know, listening to what other people have to say that might be negative. Mm-hmm. How are your best friends arriving? Hmm. Uh, probably optimistic and, um, outgoing, optimistic, and, uh, helpful. Hmm. Okay. How much time do you spend on your ideal weekend? My ideal weekend, uh, I would love to go to Vegas and have a road trip with, with three or four friends. You know, packed in the car and just, uh, lots of disposable income. And, uh, you know, good weather. When was the last time you had one? Uh, I haven't been to Vegas in probably five years. But, uh. . . I've gone to casinos with my brother and that's pretty fun sometimes. Nice. What are you most proud of in life? Uh, I'm proud that I've come a long way from when I first moved out here. I'm, uh, a lot more disciplined. Um, I read a lot. Uh, I do crosswords. And I think I've. . . Uh. . . I think I know what's important in life now. And I'm more focused and going after what I want. That's so good to hear. What are some things that you really like? Hmm. I'm not a big fan of high taxes. Um. . . But it doesn't really make me mad. It makes me frustrated and, and, uh. . . I guess I take it in stride, though. That's good. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Uh. . . I had a friend over at my apartment and I watched a movie. And that was fun. What was it about? It was a documentary. Uh. . . That's, uh, sports. . . Goodbye. Goodbye. . . Oh. . . . . . All righty. Cool. Okay. . . That's an advanced system. Uh. . . It's funny. I would say something and quickly they would know how to respond to it. . . Artificial intelligence.