okay okay okay yes okay so how are you doing today? I'm doing fine that's good where are you from originally? Indiana really? yes when did you move to LA? uh I don't know maybe 10 years ago how often do you go back to your hometown? never why? uh just don't like the cold weather I see what you mean how does it compare to LA? LA has beautiful weather and activities all the time why'd you move to LA? new life how easy was it for you to get used to living in LA? uh reasonably easy what are some things you really like about LA? the good weather the ocean and there's always something to do what are some things you don't really like about LA? the traffic I'm sure you can tell by my shoes I'm not much of a world explorer do you travel a lot? sometimes what do you enjoy about traveling? seeing new places and visiting new places visiting new people? I'd love to hear about your trip well a couple years ago I went to the Catalina Islands for my birthday nice can you tell me about that? I was I spent the whole day on the Catalina Islands I took a boat there what's one of your most memorable experiences? um hopping on an airplane and leaving Indiana for good how did you feel in that moment? okay okay what did you study at school? sleeping I love my job you could almost say it's virtually made for me what's your dream job? um being a filmmaker that sounds interesting how did you decide to do that? because it's one job I haven't had yet how hard is that? not too hard do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? shy? why? hmm because of my past can you tell me about that? um I just have trouble making new friends and just trusting people that sounds really hard okay I'm not sure if I'm being too hard sometimes when I'm feeling tense I turn on the fish tank screen saver hey I know it's not Hawaii but it's the best I've got what do you do to relax? uh watch TV or go to the movies well how are you at controlling your temper? I really don't have a temper I really don't have a temper that's good when was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? when I was 16 my stepfather uh because of uh nightmares I was having can you tell me about that? uh I was just having nightmares about my childhood about involving my biological father are they triggered by something? so far I have no idea if they are or not how do you cope with them? uh go for a walk or drive when was the last time that happened? uh maybe a few days ago how did you feel in that moment? uh just walked around the block a few times okay what's something you feel guilty about? pushing people away can you have done anything to avoid it? uh I guess try to trust them a little bit more live them in my life a little bit more tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory well that'd be easy that'd be the first half of my life why? it'd be easy to start a new life if I could I can't remember my old one I see what you mean tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make uh really I all my decisions is not that hard I just try to avoid stress and everything so I don't really have hard decisions uh huh tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently uh where every time I push someone away I wish I'd handle all those situations differently can you give me an example of that? uh well um whenever someone gets too bored or involved in my life I always say or do something to make them want to stay away from me like what? uh this depending on the type of person they are okay tell me about your relationship with your family uh I really don't have a relationship with my family I know I have a sister someplace in Vegas a half of a brother in Indiana uh my stepfather is in Arizona other than that I have no relationship with any of them can you tell me about that? uh we really don't talk so it's kind of hard to talk about haha who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? Edgar Cayce I'd love to hear all about it well he died way before I was born and I only know him from like books and documentaries uh okay how easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? uh really not that easy um I it's usually taking me like a few hours to get to finally get to sleep once I lay down on my bed tell me about that uh well basically I try to lay down I have racing or stressful thoughts uh a few times I might even try to listen to music for one hour just to see if it calms me down what are you like when you don't sleep well? stress out and just yeah just basically a little stressed out how have you been feeling lately? well I've been feeling a little bit better lately a little bit upset and just wish my life was different can you tell me about that? uh well I wish I had friends and loved ones and all that and I wish I had an actual relationship and everything but I don't yeah have you noticed any changes in your behavior? or thoughts lately? well lately I I removed a bunch of things out of my life stressful things like bills and what not and just tried to keep uh to make sure that the least amount of stress in my life by just removing just different things out of my life and trying to incorporate new things that I can do have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? yes how long ago were you diagnosed? uh I guess when I was 16 what got you to seek help? nightmares do you still go to therapy now? uh I stopped a while back because I was getting too stressed though how has staying in therapy affected you? well basically I just I just like I got rid of them out of my life because I didn't feel like they were really listening to me or anything and uh yeah so I just didn't feel too much benefits or help from them so I've been looking for alternative means like what? uh well just basically like music and uh going forcing myself to go to like different social related events have you been diagnosed with depression? yes what were your symptoms? depressed just basically just depressed uh keeping myself locked in not talking to anyone tell me about the last time you felt depressed or really happy uh I guess a few days ago uh can you tell me about that? okay well basically I feel that the best way to keep people in my life is having fake people in my life by playing online multiplayer games with avatars and usernames and everything and I just have somewhat fun going to these virtual worlds with these avatars and talking to people that way so they don't know who I really am they don't even know my real name awesome tell me how you spend your ideal weekend? okay well my ideal weekend uh let me see if I'm not working that weekend I will get up maybe go to like Starbucks or McDonald's get online while eating or drinking something maybe play an online multiplayer game for a little while and then later on in the day maybe go to a movie uh whatever's playing then uh go someplace else, relax, watch some TV um and maybe put on a DVD movie and um or I might spend a whole day driving to someplace I haven't been before or it's been a long time since I've been and try to spend a day in that area and yeah so that's the weekend uh huh is there anything you regret? my life can you tell me about that? I just regret how my life turned out I wish I had a more normal stable life what advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? uh let me see 10, 20 years ago uh where this basically uh I would just tell myself to keep a journal or uh or to basically tell myself how my life turned out now so that way hopefully the other me will make different choices what are you most proud of in your life? uh my mind what are some things you wish you could change about yourself? well I wish I was a bit healthier I wish I looked a little bit better I wish I was more mature I wish my eyesight was a lot better and I wish I had a bunch of people in my life that I could call friends what would you say are some of the best qualities you have? um I'm a freaking genius I could uh everything that I'm good at I learned self taught so basically I can't get a career in that type of stuff unless I go to school for it but it's hard to it's basically easier if I teach myself than I take some type of a class to do it and everything because yeah yeah just basically the fact I'm a freaking genius okay? okay I think I've asked everything I need to thanks for sharing your thoughts with me thank you goodbye have a good day bye