I might have pulled something. Great. Thanks so much. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confident. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? Oh, I'm fine. I'm a little. I'm a little tired, but I found out my thyroid is, I think, acting up, so. Where are you from originally? I was born in Canada, but I've lived in California most of my life, so. And it's gray today, too, so the gray weather makes you kind of, you know, sluggish. When did you go to LA? Oh, my gosh. Years and years ago. How often do you go back to LA? Not at all. I don't think I've gone back there for a long time. Well, the airfares have gone up quite a bit in the last few years. Gas prices have gone up, so travel, as much as it's a fun thing to do, it's cost prohibitive, so. How does it compare to LA? Oh, let's see. Everything has pluses and minuses. Cold weather. Cold weather. Not as much. Not as much sun, so I think I'd prefer getting more sun and having the warm weather, so. But other than that, it's very pretty back there, natural scenery, and, but I like it here. You know, the traffic's kind of heavy, but that's a small thing to deal with, so. I see what you mean. Why did you move to LA? Why did I move to LA? I moved to LA because my family came here and started, my dad got a job here, and this became our home base, and that's why. How easy was it for you to get used to living in LA? Easy, very easy, so. That's good. Uh-huh. What did you study at school? Well, in high school, you generally study general ed. They have designated courses, and then after that, went to college, and I was a business major. Let's say I was a veterinary major. And I graduated with a degree in liberal arts, so. What made you decide to do that? I don't know. Can't really pinpoint why. Okay. So. Are you still working in that? I was working in social services, but I've also worked in sales, and most recently I'm doing real estate. I'm a leasing consultant part-time. Are you happy you did that? I mean. Everything has pluses and minuses. It's okay. It's not. I don't really see too many negatives. What's your dream job? Probably to work as a gossip columnist at TMZ or one of those networks. But as you know, everything in the entertainment business is very competitive. It's who you know, so. But that would be my dream job, or probably working with cats, you know, animals, so. I'm very outgoing. In fact, I think I'm so outgoing, I scare people sometimes. There's a lot of quiet, you know, reserved people out there. So I'm kind of east coast, very, you know, I go up to people and talk to them. Very social. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fifth-pick screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? Oh my gosh, there's, I could do hundreds of things. I could read. I could watch a show, turn on the music. Music is great. Take a walk. Call my friends. Million things, so. How are you at controlling your temper? I'm pretty good. I'm very good. I mean, you know, of course, when you're driving in L.A. and somebody cuts in front of you, sometimes that can be irritating. But I'm actually. I'm not. I'm actually pretty. I'm not the type of person that will fight or get. I don't like to have confrontations, so. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone? And what was it about? I can't really remember. So as I said, there's not very many arguments. Usually I avoid arguments at any cost, so. Okay. What's something you feel guilty about? I don't really feel guilty about anything right now. Or that I can think of. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. I can't think of anything right now. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. I really can't think of any decisions that were really hard. I mean, most. It's pretty easy for me to make a decision. So. I don't have any. I don't have a family. So if I have to, you know, I had to move to San Francisco for a job once. But since I'm single, it's, I don't really have to consider other people and children and that type of thing. So it kind of makes certain things easier when you don't have a family to consider. Yeah. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. An event. Hmm. Well, obviously you don't have to. You don't, you know, the passing of a family member, you know, you wish everybody could be around forever. So I know when my father died, you know, I mean, I wish I would have had him for a lot longer. I mean, he died at the age of 77 and, you know, it would have been nice to have him around a little bit more. But, you know, can't control those things. Life has its own way of dealing with that. So. There are always good old friends, aren't there? Yes, there are. Yin and yang. Yeah. And there's always something that's ancient philosophy and it really applies. There's pluses and minuses and negatives and positives. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Well, as I said, my dad's no longer here and my mother and I, you know, we have our differences. I think mothers and daughters always do. My brother and I get along great. I see him a lot. My sister works a lot. I see her and, you know, we talk. And she's kind of got her own life. And her children, I get along great with them. So. That's good. Mm-hmm. We have a small family. What's it like to have kids? Once again, it's like that's a hard question to answer. There's so many types of kids out there. I think majority of them seem to be pretty well-behaved. I mean, you know, there's always going to be children that are kind of out of control. But I don't know. The ones that I've seen recently. They're very well-behaved, so can't say much else about that. How easy is it for you to get a good night sleep? Well, I live in an apartment. And I don't know if you've ever lived in an apartment, but there's someone that lives above me. I'm on the first floor and there's somebody on the second floor and they're pretty quiet, but they have a habit of, I guess they have lots of energy. They usually will take their time. There's showers around midnight, and sometimes they'll start washing laundry at midnight, and, of course, the pipes run through the bedroom wall. So it sounds like Niagara Falls in there. And so I don't, yeah, and I need eight hours of sleep, and I've only been getting, oh, I'd say like maybe six hours, and then I usually wake up once at night too because sometimes they'll, kind of around 2 or 3 in the morning, they'll either walk around or I'll hear something. So I'm not getting a straight eight hours of sleep, and it's definitely, but there's not, like I said, there's things you can't control. When you live in an apartment, you know, I mean, the ladies are very quiet. It's just that she has a habit of, you know, taking later showers and washing clothes at night. I can't say anything to her about that. Yeah, but, you know, there's people that are in worse situations, so I don't make a lot out of it, you know, and I just, it's not like every night, but it's, you know, at least twice a week. So, you know, I've considered maybe sleeping in another room, but for now, you know, that's, I'll deal with it, so. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Tired, very tired and hard to focus, hard to concentrate. It just takes me longer to get things done because I don't have my energy. Also, I haven't been exercising. I normally try to walk about half an hour a day, but the weather has been kind of colder and kind of dreary or so, you know, I'm not as motivated when the weather is kind of blah. So, it's a combination of both, not getting my exercise and not getting eight hours sleep. How have you been feeling lately? As I said before, I'm tired. I'm, it's a combination of the weather, you know, and here in Los Angeles right now, we have been having very gray days. I live very close to the ocean. So, the sun doesn't come out that much, so I'm not getting my serotonin. I need that. I'm not getting my eight hours of sleep because, you know, whatever. And I think my thyroid is acting up too, so that's kind of creating, you know, I have some vitamin deficiencies. And, you know, once the sun comes out, I'm kind of more energetic. It just gives you that more energy, so. Okay. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. I'm happy most of the time. I'm a pretty happy person. And I like to be around other people. I mean, of course, I like my private time, but I do like being around people quite a bit, so. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Hmm. I'm going to do a little bit of a long answer. I can't think of anything right now. I mean, I usually enjoy everything I do. There's nothing that stands out more than anything else, so. Okay. Is there anything you regret? No. I never regret anything. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? What advice would I have given? Well, I guess, yeah, I could probably change things around. I think everybody could. I probably would have done something. I think I would have had a different college major. You know, it seems like, what else? I probably wouldn't have dated certain men. Wasted time with certain people. I don't know. Those are the things that come to mind. Yeah. Maybe started saving money earlier. You know, those types of things. But, yeah. Okay. Tell us about your life. What are your best friends? Outgoing. Lots of fun to be with. Just a good friend to have. People like having me for a friend. I'm loyal, trusting, and I listen. I'm a good listener. I'm very patient as well, so. That's good. Mm-hmm. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? Well, number one would be to lose weight, but I think that's a worldwide problem. I mean, there's a lot of food around. And temptations. And especially here in America, a lot of us are couch potatoes. We sit in front of our computers. We, you know, it's just easy to, it's so easy to relax. You know, it's hard to get up and move around. You have to talk yourself into it. So, that's, the weight, you know, has, gives you more energy too if you lose weight. So, that's a big thing as well. But that's probably the thing, just the weight thing, yeah. I understand. Mm-hmm. How would your best friend describe you? I think you might have asked me that question before. Yeah. But if you want, I'll repeat it, so. What would you say are some of your best qualities? I'm very, like I said, I'm very loyal. When I tell people I'm going to do something, I do it very reliable. I'm warm. I'm very friendly. I'm a great listener. And, I mean, I've heard so many people tell me they just like being with me. So, like I said, I'm very, I'm pretty upbeat, you know. I don't let things get me down too much, so. What do you look proud of in your life? Hmm. That's a hard question. I can't think, I mean, I'm, I can't think of an answer to that one, so. What are some things you like to do for fun? For fun? Well, I love movies. I could see every movie that they make. I love going out with my friends, shopping, swap meets. My gosh, traveling is great. Road trips. That's kind of, you know, part of it, yeah, that I mentioned, so. What do you enjoy about traveling? Traveling. Getting to see different people. Getting to see different places. The history aspect of it. The foods, enjoying foods in different countries. The architecture. It's just kind of neat to get away and see a completely different place. Yeah. I'd love to hear about your trip. Okay. Well, I've been to a lot of places in Europe. I love Paris. It's such a walking city. You can. I love Paris, too. Whoever designed that city, I'll tell you, I mean, it's. You can get from one point to another. The subways are great. Each area has its own distinctive, kind of. There's the Latin Quarter where the students are. There's another area where, let's say, the fashion designers are, kind of like our Rodeo Drive here in Beverly Hills. There's an area that is more African. And they have swap meets on the weekends. weekends that are wonderful, it's very international. And then, like I said, once you get out of Paris, there's just so much history you can go see. Versailles, there's other palaces, you can go to the south of France, you know. But that's probably my favorite country. I've been to Italy as well, so. Wow! That sounds like a great situation. Yeah, well, after college, people usually, I mean, people that go to college, or either before or after college, that's a great time to go to Europe, because you're young, and you're not tied down, you don't have a family, and you kind of have a more adventuresome spirit. You got more energy, so carrying, you know, backpack or suitcases is not a big deal. So, yeah. Yeah, that's... Right. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thank you. Bye. Goodbye. Okay. Oh, that was fast. Yeah, I didn't, there wasn't any, like, shocking questions. You know. Yeah, you know, I mean. Never know, I guess. Exactly. Well, I'm going to go ahead and stop recording.