Thank you. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Sure. Okay. So, how are you doing today? Great. That's good. Where are you from originally? Philadelphia. When did you move to LA? About five years ago. That's a long time. How often do you go back to your hometown? Once a year. How does it compare to LA? It doesn't. Can you tell me about that? LA is a lot more fun. Why did you move to LA? For acting. Are you still doing that? Sure. I'm a professional actor. How did you decide to do that? When I was young, it was all that I wanted to do. What's your dream job? My dream job is an actor on an HBO series. Cool. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes, I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? Moderately. What do you enjoy about traveling? Meeting new people, eating new food. I'd love to hear about your trip. I don't really feel like talking about it. Okay. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? I can be shy at times. I can be outgoing. Maybe a little bit of both. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank's screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? Just take a deep breath or maybe do some reading. How are you at controlling your temper? Pretty good. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone? And what was it about? Oh, well, it was maybe about two months ago. My brother and I were arguing over rent payments. That sucks. Yeah, it does. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Very good. Very strong. That's good. Yeah. What's something you feel guilty about? I don't know. I can't really say. I don't really feel guilty often. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. I don't really have anything that I'd like to erase from my memory. Okay. What are some things that make you really mad? What makes me mad? Ignorance, racism, things like that. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. That I wish I would have handled differently. I don't really feel like discussing that. Okay. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Well, I'm kind of in the midst of it right now. I don't know whether I want to move to New York or to stay in LA. So it's a tough decision. What made you decide to do that? To do what? Why don't we talk about that later? Okay. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? It's pretty easy. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Um, I am sensitive. I am vulnerable. Sensitive and vulnerable. Okay. How have you been feeling lately? As of late I've been feeling pretty well. Can't complain. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? Uh, very clear-minded thoughts. Hmm-mm. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Last time I felt really, really happy. I had a real nice date about a month ago and we had a good time and I was real happy that day and the day after. Can you tell me about that? Well, it was a young girl that I had met a couple years ago and we finally were available to go out and hang out. We went and had some wine at a wine bar and then we went and had dinner and that was the date. I had a great time. That's great. Thank you. Tell me how you spend your ideal weekend. My ideal weekend. Well. I like to watch English League Soccer and sometimes if I'm in Philly I spend time with my family on weekends. If not, I'll just hang out with my brother or Sundays I ref soccer. Just really laid back and chill. Nice. Thank you. Is there anything you regret? No. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? I don't know. 10 or 20 years ago, what advice would I give myself? I would say never give up, study hard, save money. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? Maybe wish I was a little more outgoing, a little more enthusiastic in social settings. I don't know. Tell me about a time when someone made you feel really badly about yourself. I really can't remember a time. I've always felt really good. Whatever people have to say about me really doesn't change how I feel about myself. How would your best friend describe you? He would say that a very warm, very caring, loving, genuine friend. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? My father. Can you tell me about that? Yeah. He is a man of few words. He's a man of few words. He's very calm, slow to anger, and very warm, very loving man, responsible. He's a gentleman. He has a great sense of style, and he's a great cook. What are you most proud of in your life? Most proud of? Uh... Uh... I blue out three times every day. So one out of five times or five, I like being objective. What's the biggest reason you clubs have taught you? It's the real love Росс developer, Kevin Kern My name is Kevin Kern. Yeah. Okay.