Okay. Yes. Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing pretty well. I have some stressful circumstances going on, but right now I'm engaged. That's good. Where are you from originally? I'm from Minnesota. Really? When did you move to L.A.? 31 years ago. That's a long time. Half my life. How often do you go back to your hometown? Frequently, I've been back there quite a bit, but over the years, not that often. How does it compare to L.A.? Well, it's a whole different experience. I go back there to see my family and old friends, so L.A. is home. It's nice to return here. That's good. Why did you move to L.A.? To be an actor. Are you still doing that? I'm just actually getting around to it. I was in another business. I was in another business for 25 years, and now finally I can't put it off anymore. What made you decide to do that? The economy. It's easy to find work in show business, it seems, as it is any of the other jobs I've done in the past. Yeah. I see what you mean. Thank you. What did you study at school? Oh, a whole variety of things, but mostly having to do with theater. What's your dream job? Well, to be a successful actor would be nice. Okay. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Outgoing. With elements of shyness. I'm too intense. I turn on the big big screen saver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? Well, I read and I cook and that's about it. I'm a good cook. I'm a good cook. Oh, I'm a big radio listener to talk radio, national public radio and more not crazy stuff. Sensible listening, nice content, interesting human interest. Like what? Oh. Well, I'm also a comedian and so I like to listen to radio shows that have comedy. Like. Okay. How are you at controlling your temper? Um. I'm pretty good. I mean, I'm not perfect, but I can get very upset. Mm-hmm. Wonderful. How long have you argued with someone and what was it about? Oh, probably with my wife about my methods of job hunting and like that. How hard is that? It's difficult. It's difficult. She. She. She. She. We're very different and I have very different MOs and so for me to do things my way is not always easy. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Tell me about a situation that you wish you had handled differently. Oh, well just the other night I was performing in a nightclub and had an opportunity to introduce myself to a very famous person and I didn't do it. Why? I'm not sure, I guess I didn't know if it would be appropriate to approach him. I miss you. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Oh. Oh. Oh. I can't think of one. Okay. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Well, I've been married for, I'll be 24 years in July, which is a couple of months. And my wife and I have not been sleeping in the same bed for about three years. And, but we have a very high achieving daughter who's going to graduate from high school this spring. And she's just gotten accepted at a college that she wants to go to. With a very nice scholarship. That's great. Mm-hmm. Do you find it easy to be a parent? Yeah. Well, my daughter's been very low maintenance for me, perhaps more so for my wife, but she's always been an excellent child. What are some ways that you've been able to get her to be a parent? Well, we're more similar, I think, than different. I'm much more aware of what's happening in the world and much more informed than my parents were. But in terms of child rearing, I think I'm more aware of what's happening in the world. I think we're all, we've all been kind of hands off and my wife has been more hands on. Yeah. What's the hardest thing about being a parent? Well, the financial responsibility is. You know, it's not just about the money. It's about wanting to make sure that your child has everything that her peers have and not wanting her to not have the same as her friends. Yes. as a very wealthy friend, so it's, I am not a gifted money maker. And so it's a struggle, but we keep up. That's good. There's some of it that have positive influence in your life. Oh, a couple of different. One preacher whose church I attended for about 20 years until he died was very influential and also another spiritual guru that, sort of put me on a path to breaking patterns of behavior that were kind of dictated by my upbringing. Like what? Oh, just, well, instead of working for somebody else, being able to start a business and be in business for yourself and to, you know, not be dependent on just one source of income. Okay. Okay. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Oh. Oh. I think I was meeting one particular woman when I first got out here. Tell me about that. She left me less than healthy physically. Sorry to hear that. Yeah. How is she? Well, didn't you ever, would you go to bake what do you transitioned to tell me how the What do you contribute the most? Well, like, to try and keep my favoriteos. Does this make you feel more. What may I do more so. You liked it? And I sentence me to a pillow in the way. And I ran back. You I wouldn't know what your child says. Cause there's only safety here after this sentence, which is why everyone has to get a학교現在. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Well, I cope pretty well. I guess I'm just not quite as functional as I'd like to be. There are a couple of nights a week when I work until 2 o'clock in the morning and don't get to bed until 3. Normally I need 7 hours if I only get 5 or 6 and I'm sluggish. How have you been feeling lately? Very anxious. Can you tell me about that? Well I have... been... I have bills to pay and not a lot of income coming in. That sounds really high. Yeah, it's because I don't like to fall behind. I feel like I'm worried about losing ground and the stakes are... are high and... So... It's an uncomfortable position. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with a symptom? I am a classic depressive and... I'm a very... Yeah, I guess I have. I guess I have. I do see a therapist, and... Though... the therapist I'm seeing now is not trying to prescribe drugs or medications. Previous ones have. How long ago were you diagnosed? Two years ago. Probably six years ago. What got you into health? Well, my wife kind of pushed me into it. She thought it was a way of, I think, getting help, finding work. And it's not. It's just... I don't know. I've enjoyed having someone to talk to. That's good. Did you think you had a problem before you found out? Um... Not really. What were your symptoms? Oh, um... Just, uh... Kind of... Not wanting to, um... Face the day. Just kind of wanting to, um... Just, uh... Kind of a weariness with the struggle. Uh... And, um... Just a... Displeasure with my life. Mm-hmm. Do you still go to therapy now? Yes. Do you feel like there's a useful? Their what? Do you feel like there's a useful? I don't understand that word. What sort of changes have you noticed since you've been going to therapy? Oh, um... Well, I... I've been... Um... It's... Something I look forward to, because, um... I feel like I'm talking to someone who, um... Understands me. So... Yeah. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Hmm... Um... Um... I, I can't. I don't know. Um... Well ehh.. Anyways... I didn't want to... Each little acting gig that I get makes me happy, but you know just mildly happy and they usually turn out to be disappointing experiences and so I'm never over excited with happiness. Well, yesterday I made a dessert to celebrate my daughter's scholarship and it was delicious and we really enjoyed that. That's so good to hear. Is there anything you regret? Um... Yeah. I think... No. Except meeting that one woman. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Um...probably... What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Try a little harder. I had started this business around that time. And it was... Was there any thing you regret testifying about other times? It was difficult, but we were successful at it, and I guess I could have gotten it rolling even more so that it wouldn't be so dead today. How do you spend your ideal weekend? Getting out of town, going away, which is rarely possible. But, yeah. Okay. Okay. What are you most proud of in your life? Well, my daughter is a great source of pride, and the fact that I've been pretty successful in my endeavors. And now I'm just... going for the big apple. And I hope to be successful there, too. That's good. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Okay. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. You're welcome. Goodbye. Goodbye. Goodbye. Goodbye. No complain easily. Yeah. I find it kissed hot to have a happy one. Oh, yeah. This is communion. So so now I've needed to write numbers like I just said. Please take care with your responses.