Okay. Yes. I'm doing well. California. I like the weather. I like the people. I don't like the traffic. That's primarily it. Sociology. Yep. It's a topic that just really interested me the most out of all the other subjects. No. To be a writer. I like being able to write what I want to write. Right now I write things that I'm not really... that interested in. Like what? Like articles about teenager culture. Stuff like that. What do you think of the new kids? I think they have it pretty easy. I don't know how easy they have it. Yeah. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? No. Not really. Okay. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Depends on the situation or who I'm around. When I first meet people I can be shy. But if it's someone I've known for a while I can be outgoing. Uh huh. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fifth-kings green saver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. Haha. What do you do to relax? Umm, I'll lay down or try some sort of deep breathing or just maybe do something that's kind of fun and mind-numbing like watch TV. How are you at controlling your temper? I'm pretty good. I don't really let anger show that much. I'm not like a...I don't have a fiery temper or anything like that. I'm pretty rational. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone? And what was it about? Umm...I actually can't remember when the last time I argued with someone was because it's been so long. Wow. What's something you feel guilty about? Umm...I guess I feel guilty about the fact that I don't talk to my grandparents as much as I should. Okay. Tell me about your relationship. What's your relationship with your family? Umm...I'm close with my grandparents, but not really anyone else in my family. Why? Uhh...because they basically sort of raised me. Uhh...and my parents weren't really in the picture that much. I understand. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. Umm... I can't really think of one right now. Okay. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Uhh...I guess when my sister died it was really traumatizing. I'm sorry. Mm-hmm. Is it uncomfortable? Is it uncomfortable for you to talk about this? Yeah. Yes. Okay. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Umm...I guess the hardest decision I've ever had to make is deciding whether or not to divorce my husband. What made you decide to do that? Uhh...because we weren't getting along and there was no reason to stay married. Okay. I was really desperate to get married. But I still felt like I should stick it out. How hard was it? I mean...it was hard at the time. Uhh...but I made the right decision, I think. Okay. Has someone else been a positive influence in your life? Uhh...my grandmother was a positive influence from a young age. Can you tell me about that? Umm...she's just a very strong woman. powerful sort of staunch character and that rubbed off on me. Not really super easy. I sort of I mean it's probably my fault I go to bed too late. Just sort of foggy and distracted. I have trouble concentrating You mean like my body? Normal, fine, no complaints. No, it's been the same as ever. No. No. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Uh, last night I was just hanging out with my friends and was just having like a really good time sharing stories and laughing and stuff. That's great. How were your best friends driving you? Uh, probably funny and easy to get along with but also caring. Yeah. Tell me how you spend your ideal weekend. Uh, I spend my ideal weekend not really doing much. Like maybe just sitting around reading or going to the movies, watching TV. Hmm. Is there anything you regret? Uh, no. I don't think there's not, I don't think, I think regretting things is a waste of time. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Um, don't try to, don't go out of your way to try and impress people. If they like you, then they like you. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? Um. What would you say to yourself? Uh, I think that I'm a little bit more of a person than I am. Sometimes, sometimes I can be kind of lazy. Uh, I'd like to have more of a, um, like sort of, uh, better work ethic, I guess. Can you give me an example of that? Uh, just sort of putting off stuff, um, until, you know, right when it's due or after it's due, things like that. Um, procrastinating. Okay. Tell me about a time when someone made you feel really bad about yourself. Uh, sometimes for the things that I write, uh, people will write negative things about me, like in the comments section on a website. That'll make me feel bad. That sucks. What would you say a familiar person said to you? I'm, uh, articulate and funny and a good friend. Mm-hmm. What are you most proud of in your life? Um. I guess I'm most proud of the fact that, uh, I am satisfied with myself. Uh-huh. And my friends and my status in the world. I'm proud of the fact that I feel comfortable with it. That's so good to hear. What are some things that usually put you on a good mood? Um, just hanging out with my friends. Uh, sort of people watching. Watching a movie that's good. Um, listening to music. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Mm-hmm. Goodbye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Thank you.