Okay, great. Thank you. Thanks. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing fine. That's good. Where are you from originally? California, here in Los Angeles. Really? Mm-hmm. What are some things you really like about L.A.? I love being near the beach. I love the beach. I love living in a big city. And I love the fact that I have lots of friends and family here. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? Traffic. Just so many, sometimes too many people. But apart from that, I'm generally happy here. Okay. What did you study at school? Photography and language studies. That sounds interesting. How did you decide to do that? I love photography. I love photography. I was always interested in it and studied it in high school as well. So I wanted to continue to learn more about it. And with languages, I come from a mixed background. So I wanted to learn the languages of my ethnic background. How hard is that? It wasn't hard. It was a passion. So I enjoyed it. Are you still working on that? I'm not. No. What's your dream job? To do photography full-time. And also to do some of the things that I'm passionate about. More creative things. Like what? I have an idea. I'd like to make a robe line, women's robes and things like that. Awesome. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? I have. I've traveled quite a bit and I love travel. What do you enjoy about traveling? I love traveling. seeing different cultures, different countries, meeting new people, all of that, and the language. I lived in Greece for over a year. I taught English there and moved around to different parts of Greece and really had a great time. What's one of your most memorable experiences? I think just having my group of friends that I met there and going through the experience with them. I think one of my most memorable experiences was going to Elefonisos in a car with everybody and having just a fantastic time. That sounds like a great situation. Yes, it was. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? I think I'm shy to begin with. And as I get to know people, then I'm much more outgoing. What do you study at school? Photography and language studies. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the 15 screensavers. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? I just stay at home. Maybe watch a movie. I just sit down, rest in bed. Watching a movie in bed. That's probably one of the things that I like to do to relax. Okay. How are you at controlling your temper? I think very good. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? It was probably with my boyfriend regarding money issues. Okay. What's something you feel guilty about? I think there were a few months ago, when I was positively as on top of my classes in I feel guilty about not generating as much income as I need to right now. Can you tell me about that? I'm having some struggles in my career right now. and financially it's becoming very difficult. I'm sorry. That sounds really hard. Yeah, it has been difficult. But I've been working very hard to remedy that. That's great. Can you give me an example of that? So while I'm here and I'm doing this focus study, I'm doing many things to generate more money, working harder, but looking for other ways to generate money outside of my career. Mm-hmm. Tell me about Nevev or something that you wish you could have raped from your memory. Probably being raped. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. Do you have disturbing thoughts? Sometimes. Are you triggered by something? Not that I'm aware of. How have you been feeling lately? I've been feeling stressed. I've been feeling stressed and worried. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? I don't seem to have any problem with it. I seem to get a good night's sleep almost every night. That's good. Mm-hmm. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Grumpy and lethargic and in the morning. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. Hmm. A situation I wish I would handle differently. Um. I really can't think of one right now. Okay. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. The hardest decision that I've ever had to make. It was probably deciding to not have a child. Can you tell me about that? Well, I was pregnant and wasn't sure whether or not I should continue the pregnancy. And that was also due to financial burden. And the father who I was involved with did not want the child. So I was very worried. So I made that very, very difficult decision. Yeah. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Hmm. Really, really happy. I know. When I went to Cancun on a holiday over the New Year. New Year period. New Year holiday. How did you feel in that moment? I felt absolutely fantastic. I felt happy. I felt relaxed. I felt like I didn't have a care in the world temporarily. Free. That's great. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? I wish I could be a little bit stronger and more assertive. Definitely more assertive. What would you say to somebody who has qualities? I would say. I'm a wonderful, wonderful friend. When I love somebody, you know, I love them very deeply. Friends, family, boyfriend. So I think that's good. I'm very loyal as a friend. I'm honest. I care about people. I'm fun to be with. So I think those are some of my best qualities. Hmm. Tell me about your relationship with your family. My relationship with my family, with my father is not so great. My parents were divorced when I was young and he's sort of been in and out of my life, you know, forever. Mostly out. So that's, it's not fantastic but it's something that I'm used to. So it's not as painful as it would be had he been there and then I lost him. But it's still, it's still, it's still not the best situation. I mean, I still wish that could be remedied somehow. Yeah. So there's good and bad relationships in my family. There's someone that's been a positive influence in your life. Someone that's been there for me since I was very, very young and has always been just incredible and I love her so much. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? 10 or 20 years ago, I would have told myself to work harder then and not have so much fun so I don't have to work so hard now. Okay. Is there anything you regret? I regret exactly that. I regret not taking my career seriously earlier on because now it's been, it's been, it's been a lot of work. And it's been much harder. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. I think it was taking the kids to the pier and spending some wonderful time with them and making them happy. That was probably a great time, one of the best times in the last few weeks. Tell me about your kids. Yeah. And they're great kids. Do you find it easy to be a parent? No. I think it's challenging. It is more difficult because they're stepchildren so there are some times when I'm not sure exactly how much to get involved and how much not to get involved. But we're very lucky because they are really good kids. They do tend to fight a lot. But it's not as difficult as I think some other parents have it. That's good. What are some ways that you're different than your parents? I make a conscious effort not to punish them. I make a conscious decision not to scream at them the way that I was screamed at. I was screamed at a lot as a child. And it was really difficult. So I make sure not to do that. What are you most proud of in your life? I think I'm most proud of the fact that I've been able to try to be a better person. I've traveled the world and live in other places, many, many other places around the country and around the world. And the fact that I've learned several languages. And the fact that I've been able to maintain really long, long, long relationships with my friends. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thank you. Goodbye. Goodbye. Bye.