Okay, thank you. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? Okay. That's good. Where are you from originally? Virginia. Really? When did you move to L.A.? I wanted to live somewhere different than Virginia with a little bit more diversity. How often do you go back to your hometown? Once a year, maybe. How does it compare to L.A.? It's a lot slower and there's a lot less to do there. Why did you move to L.A.? I wanted to live somewhere different and a nicer, warmer climate and somewhere where there's a lot more to do and there's a lot more going on. How easy was it for you to get used to living in L.A.? What are some things you really like about L.A.? What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? People don't appreciate what they have here that just come here and want to take something but they don't want to give anything back and bad drivers. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? Not as much as I would like to. I travel whenever I can but usually can't afford to that much. What do you enjoy about traveling? I like taking pictures a lot and I just like exploring new places. My wife and I like to see wildlife and hike and monuments and just seeing different areas. I must have heard about one of your trips. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Well, we went to central California. We'd like to be able to go more internationally places but that takes a while to afford so we've gone more locally. We went to Hearst Castle and see the elephant seals and things like that. Nice. What's one of your most memorable experiences? I guess our Palm Springs trip for our anniversary. We did the tram and a nice hotel and jacuzzi and romantic dinner and it was a good time overall. That sounds like a great situation. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? I guess somewhere in between. Would you study at the University of California? I'd say English and film. That sounds interesting. How did you decide to do that? Well, I was told I needed to go to college and I hadn't quite decided what to do yet so I just picked something I like to do for the time being. Are you happy with that? Well, I wish I had not been pressured so I had more time to figure out what I wanted to. I might have done something different like film school. physical therapy but no I've been teaching gymnastics which is something I used to do before I needed to not starve and it it didn't end up being as bad as I thought it would be so I went for it and ended up being kind of fun dream job is to have money and not have to work for it overall pretty good don't remember what about but it probably would have been a few weeks ago with my wife well anyone that I've ever actually gotten upset and yelled I always wish I wouldn't do that but sometimes when someone's not listening it drives me crazy you know if I just saying something over and over and they're just clearly not listening it makes me really upset tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make I don't know I I spent a lot of time on them but I don't I don't know what the hardest one is because if I decide to go with something and you know it's usually for a good reason what's something you feel guilty about? well I guess I feel guilty about moving to California and that I left my family in Virginia I mean I know I shouldn't but they always seem to miss me and even though they don't like living there you know I'm the one that moved away so it's like I abandoned them I know I shouldn't but they always seem to miss me and even though they don't like living there you know I'm the one that moved away so it's like I abandoned them how hard is that? well I mean I don't miss Virginia but I do miss them so I guess a little hard tell me about your relationship with your family I have a good relationship with my with my wife with my in-laws with my mom dad and sister there's no problems everyone gets along well how close are you to your family? very close that's good tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory? um I mean any anything where someone gets hurt either physically or otherwise how easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? it depends on how much exercise I have get a lot of exercise it's pretty easy if I don't it's not how easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? um kind of like right now just a little bit slowing out of it but not really um too different otherwise uh-huh how have you been feeling lately? um just kind of run down because my um my mother-in-law is dying and we just spent like three days in the hospital and we're gonna go back after that and I'm just kind of feeling a little bit better yeah and she wants to do the horoscope but's not going to do this so not a lot of time to sleep I'm sorry have you noticed anything in your behavior or thoughts lately? well just um just uh just slower and more tired and a little more out of it that's all have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? no have you been diagnosed with depression? no tell me about the last time you felt weird? happy? Usually just when I'm having a fun day either on my own or with my wife. That's pretty easy for me. Just getting outside and hiking or exercising is not hard for me. How would your best friend have brought you? I'm not sure. Maybe maybe like eccentric but in a good way hopefully. No. To be careful with your to be careful with your job to make sure you could keep from being injured and to I don't know just just your normal your normal kind of older kind of wisdom. Can you tell me about that? Not much to say really. Everyone realizes things when they get older they wish they had when they were younger. Yeah. Yeah. And where you spent your license We could have both been back home. How ever Talk to your partner. Where do youuminate. Hold on. No. Not much to say. It just hurt my back at work and I just like to get past it because it's holding me back from doing a lot of things. That's all. Well, I used to do gymnastics and trampoline and used to be a lot more active and work out more. Now I can only work out a little bit because it hurts too much. Tell me how you spend your annual weekend. Probably like during the day going on a hike or two to a park with my wife and enjoying taking pictures and wildlife and exercising. And then at night, you know, we watch a movie or go dancing or just something like that. What do you love about your job? I'm proud of moving here. I came here without knowing anyone and I was at a point where I could have stayed in Virginia and gotten comfortable and, you know, ended up doing something I regretted. But I came out and I've always thought that was a good decision. That's good. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? My parents, my grandparents, my wife. Most people in my life have been. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Goodbye. Bye-bye. Thank you. Thank you. I'll do a quick post-credit about your .