I'm not going to see a psychiatrist. Cool. So now I'm going to give you that window. And you can come to the back and let me know. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I've been creating a response to people in safe and secure environments. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions, then start it. And please feel free to respond to anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Sure. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm good. But I'm kind of cold. That's good. Morning. Where are you from originally? L.A. Born and raised. Born and raised. Born and raised. What are some things you really like about L.A.? It's home, food, people, culture, traffic. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? There's a lot of us. Too many of us, probably. Yeah. I can't even. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? I have in the past. I haven't traveled lately. What do you enjoy about traveling? The destination. I don't enjoy the traveling anymore at all. I did when I was young, but no longer. It's the destination point. I must be doing that on your trip. Okay. In 92, I went to Spain. And my grandma, my father's mother was born in Spain. I went back to trace her roots. I spent a week in Madrid, a week in Barcelona, and a week in Mallorca. I had a great time. That's great. I'm glad you're here. I enjoyed it. What was the most memorable experience? It was an everyday thing. People were friendly. Finding out some of the things about my grandmother and her family were interesting. What did you study at school? I studied poli sci and sociology. How did you decide to do that? Well, at the time, it seemed like the easiest thing to do. Are you still working on that? No, no. What's your dream job? Well, I had my dream job for a while. I was doing sports research for Native American tribes. Awesome. I enjoyed it. But it's not as often as it was. Mainly because of the school. I was a part of the sports bureau that exists now that didn't exist when I started. When I do it, I still enjoy it. Do you think you'll be more shy or outgoing? I'll be what suits me in any given situation. Sometimes when I feel intense, I turn on the fish pig's screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. I'm going to try. What do you do to relax? I listen to music. Like what? I like oldies, jazz, soft music. How are you at controlling your temper? I've learned to do it well. It wasn't always that way, but I've learned to do it well. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? When I argued, I assume you mean words. It was my youngest daughter. It was about a year and a half ago. Can you tell me about that? It stemmed over an incident. I didn't like the way her husband said something to her, and it bothered me. And when I told her, she got extremely defensive. And rather than deal with it, she became angry with me. How did you feel in that moment? I was mad. Yeah. Tell me about your kids. Three girls, 38, 37, 31. Three granddaughters, 11, 14, 18. So I haven't won an argument in a long time, but I adore all six of them. Do you find it easy to be a parent? Well, now I don't really consider myself a parent. Since I'm growing up, my baby is 31. And you never lose that, but I'm not parenting at this point in my life. I'm enjoying my grandchildren. When I was a parent, yeah, it's a difficult job. What's the hardest thing about the interview? Getting to their level and understanding what they understand and don't understand. And not putting your stuff in front of theirs. What's the best thing about being a parent? The hugs. What are some ways that you're different than your parents? Well, my dad was physical. In those days, nobody called child services if you got hit. My mother was very loving. But my dad, he'd raise his hand to you if he thought it would disappoint you. I never did that. Tell me about your relationship with your family. I adored my mother. My dad was a hard guy, but I loved him. I never felt abused by him. But I mean, the one thing I remember, he said, when you're capable of kicking my ass, you can leave this house. That's kind of the basis of our relationship. Okay. Who's some of the positive influence in your life? My mother. My kids. My grandkids. Can you tell me about that? Well, I'm one of three sons. So I really didn't have any experience with females other than with my mother in terms of being related. And my grandma. And then when my first daughter was born, it was like, wow. That was it. I fell madly in love with her. Changed my life. What's something you feel guilty about? Yeah, that's the way it happened. What's something you feel guilty about? When my mother got sick, I wasn't there for her the way I should have been. And I don't feel good. Have you done anything to avoid it? Oh, yeah. You can always fix what you do, yeah. I was just in a real bad situation. But that doesn't excuse the fact that I wasn't there the way I should have been. Okay. At least not in my mind. Tell me about a situation that you will see again in your life. My second marriage, probably. She wanted to have children. I already had my children with my first wife. And I had told her initially that I did not want to have children. I mean, I had three. And I was good with that. And she indicated that she didn't want to have children. So we got married. And then her best friend got pregnant. And our relationship changed. And I basically wouldn't relent. And we ended up getting divorced. I don't know that I would have had children with her, but I wasn't very flexible in the process. How hard is that? What, to be flexible? I don't know. Sometimes I am. Sometimes I'm not. Okay. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. I've been pulling my father out of life support. What made you decide to do that? I just kept going back to something he said to me when I was younger. That he would come back and haunt me. If I let him lay there and suffer. Mm-hmm. It took me a while to convince my other two brothers, but that's what we did. Okay. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Something I could erase from my memory. Being locked up for a while. I'd like to erase that from my memory. Can you tell me about that? It's just, it's an everyday hell. It's just, it's an everyday hell. I feel like I'm going back to the reality of life, where there's very little humanity. And you're going to do some things that you're not proud of. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? I've never slept a lot. And I'm one of those people that if I wake up, I have a hard time going back to sleep. So it's difficult. Unless I'm really tired then, you know. What are you like when you don't sleep well? I'm pretty much the way I am. the same. I don't change. How have you been feeling lately? So-so. I had a, uh, things are good with the kids and the grandkids except for the little incident with my granddaughter, my youngest daughter. But I had a friend recently who was, uh, run over in a crosswalk and he's on, he's on life support. So I haven't been feeling too good about that. It's affected me. It wasn't like he was jaywalking or anything. He literally was walking in the crosswalk and the guy never even hit the brake, so. And he's on life support at this point. Wow. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? No, not really. The consistent thing about me is I'm very inconsistent. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Uh, no. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. But I've had moments where I felt I was, I was depressed. Okay, I was talking when you were talking so I didn't hear the question. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Uh, uh, yesterday. Had a conversation with my 14-year-old granddaughter. I'm happy, I have moments of happiness every day. Because I either speak to or... I'm happy. I text with my daughters and granddaughters every day. Even if we're upset with one another. That's great. Is there anything you regret? Oh, I have a lot of regrets. Can you give me an example of that? Uh, I should have went to law school. That's, that's kind of something I thought, yeah, I've begun to think about more in my lifetime. I was accepted. I just didn't, I had other things I thought I wanted to do. Like what? Uh, I played with, uh, wanting to be a kicker for football, on a football team. Had some tryouts, things like that. But they didn't pan out. And as that didn't pan out, I sort of lost my zest for wanting to be a lawyer. So I just did other things. Hmm. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? I don't think it would make that much difference. I probably wouldn't listen to myself. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? Uh, about myself. Uh, mm-hmm. Uh, I could be, uh, if I don't like you, I can be very, uh, very mean. Very difficult if I don't like you. I'd very much like to change that. Has that gotten you in trouble? It has in the past, yeah. Tell me about a time when someone made you feel really badly about yourself. Well, I was theory that you can make me feel bad about myself only if I let you. And I'm not real big on letting people do that to me. Although my first wife, when she left me with the children, she, you know, that it was my fault. And I wasn't sure that I believed that, but I knew I was an ass. And, and, uh, so I probably believed it in, not in its totality, but in part. Yeah. What would you say are some of your best qualities? Hmm. I'm very, uh, I'm not judgmental. I will listen to anybody, uh, whether I agree with you or disagree with you. Uh, I've taught myself to, uh, control anger that I, that I have. Uh, and, uh, if, if I call you my friend or if I tell you I love you, I, I mean it. That's not something that I do, uh, casually. Okay. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Uh, oh, okay. Well, I, I played 18 holes of golf with a, with an old dear friend. And we got caught up and, uh, we had four hours on the golf course, two hours at dinner. And met a new wife. Uh, we had a good time. A lot of, a lot of memories came back. What do you think of today's kids? Hmm. Uh, well, I, I like my, uh, my grandkids. I like to, you know, I like the hell out of them. I don't know if all kids are like that. I think they rely too much on, uh, rely too much on technology. Yeah. But that's me. Mainly because I don't. But if my grandkids are any, any, uh, sampling of it, I think they're, I think they're pretty good. What do you look proud of in your life? Uh, raising my girls. Basically by myself, with the help of my mother. I think that's the thing I'm most proud of. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. All right. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Okay. Nice chatting with you. Goodbye. Bye. All righty. All righty. All righty. All righty. gonna come back and you can... Let me give you a sense of what you're doing, okay? Faster. Harder. P Screen R Malcolm All right, let's work this one. Okay, so, when we're trying to build that solution, you're looking a little more neonate about to your kid and thinking like seriously.