Okay. All right, great. So now I'm going to give you the doorbell again. When she's done talking, she'll let you know. Okay. Thank you. Mm-hmm. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I've been created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions and get started. And please feel free to call me anytime. Your answers are totally confident. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? Pretty good. That's good. Where are you from originally? As far as my parents, Ethiopia. Really? Yes. What are some things you really like about LA? The beach. The beaches. The warm weather. The diverse environment. What are some things you don't really like about LA? Traffic. Yeah. I see what you mean. What do you study at school? Well, I'm currently in school. I'm studying African Studies. Cool. How did you decide to do that? I've always been interested in African Studies. Actually, I've always wanted to help people. And I figured that I could help them by trying to learn about it and going back to Africa and make an influence. That's great. Can you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Kind of in between. I have my shy moments, but then when I'm around a group of people that I enjoy, I'm pretty outgoing. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on this vegetarian screen saver. Hey, I know it's not for everyone. I'm from Hawaii. But it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? To relax? I normally write or I go to the beach and just sit there and play my guitar. How are you at controlling your temper? Pretty good. I don't really get angry or anything like that. I tend to keep it in or try to release it by writing. When was the last time you argued with someone? And what was it about? I don't know. The last time I argued with someone was when I was in high school. I actually can't remember the last time I argued with someone. Okay. What's something you feel guilty about? All the people I've hurt in the past. Can you tell me about that? Well, I've like cheated on people, hurt their feelings intentionally, tried to make them done things I shouldn't have done that I regret now. Tell me about a situation that you wish you had handled differently. Well, with my ex, I could have ended it better, so we could be on better terms now. I probably shouldn't have argued so much or tried to instigate so many things. I probably should have just let it go with the flow and just see how it turned out. Yeah. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Okay. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Tell me about that. Um, well, he had a tumor that he had to get removed, so it was just hard seeing him have to be in the bed and just be in the hospital when he really didn't want to be there because he's a really live person and he'd rather be running around and stuff like that. But just seeing him stuck in bed was just terrible. Yeah. That sounds really hard. Tell me about your relationship with him. Yeah. Mm-hmm. Me and my family aren't very close. We don't, I mean, they've always been there for me, and I appreciate it, but we've never had that close connection, especially since they're foreign, so they don't really understand where I'm trying to come from, having been grown up out in America. So it's pretty different when it comes to racial, I mean, the cultural boundaries that we kind of step each other's feet on. But aside from that, we have a decent relationship when we do speak to each other. It does get kind of awkward, but. It's okay. Okay. What do you think of the new kids? I think they are out of control. I think that they're learning things that they shouldn't know at this age. I think that they're doing things they shouldn't be doing. And I don't feel like enough people are telling them that they shouldn't be doing it. I feel like they're being applauded by the media. They're being applauded by celebrities that they follow. And there's not enough being done about it. And they're just getting lost. Yeah. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? It depends on the night. Some nights it's pretty hard. Some nights I fall asleep like a baby. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Usually creative, actually. When I can't sleep, I'll just stay up and I'll write something or I'll read a book, and ideas will pop up. Stuff like that is usually hard. It's usually a good thing when I can't sleep. It's nothing really bad because I'm having bad thoughts or anything like that. Okay. How have you been feeling lately? Lately, between a mix of good and bad. I have my happy moments where I'm energized and I'm alive. And then some days where I'm just sitting there, just mellow, thinking, not like my live self. Why? I don't know. It's just always been like that. I always have those ups and those downs. But they kind of balance each other out. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. The last time I felt really happy was today. Tell me more about that. Just from the moment I woke up. It was a beautiful sunny day. I went to see some friends. We had a good time. Went to school. Had some good grades on some papers. Wrote a good essay. I feel pretty accomplished. And I feel like my day is just a good day. That's so good to hear. How would your best friend describe you? My best friend would describe me as odd. Most people would describe me as odd. Why? I say a lot of odd things. I do odd things. I'm interested in things that most people aren't. Like what? Just like old literature. Revolutionary stuff. Stuff about changing the world. But through understanding. And understanding what underground means. Is there anything you regret? No, I don't live a life of regret. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? To never let fear stop you from doing anything. Tell me how you spend your ideal weekend. Reading, hanging out with friends, driving around, finding something to do, just going on an adventure. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? I don't wish I could change anything about myself. I just wish I could build myself into the person I'm truly supposed to be. Tell me about a time when someone made you feel really bad about yourself. Um. I was a little kid. I'd only do things that the loved ones, best friends and모 But This one time me and my best friend got into an argument and she pointed out all the things I've done that I shouldn't have done all at one time. How I've hurt people. How I've hurt her. The ways I've done them that were brutal. And it just made me feel bad once I reflected on it all. my parents I mean although we don't see eye to eye they always bring me to this realization that I need at the end of the day although I never listen to them or I don't choose to listen to them once it happens I learn from it and I'm like oh that's what my parents told me so I learned to trust them more and I learned to understand that they are wiser than me and that they do know more than me not so much anymore I travel around LA try to find new sites to see but as far as I don't travel outside I'm discovering new things discovering things you never knew were there or the limitless possibilities I discovered I like I enjoy discovering new people new cultures new things that go against what's normal for us and for myself a few days ago I just drove out to the middle of the desert and I just sat there and I just enjoyed all that the desert had to offer and it was just enjoyable. I felt free away from all this these cities and these buildings and it just felt nice to be out in the middle of nowhere at a completely random time. It felt good. I'm most proud that I've always been different that despite how many people have told me that I'm really weird or I'm odd or I think weird things I've always maintained my original mentality. Alright.