Thank you. Yeah. I'm fine. Pacific Grove, California. The wholesale opportunities and all the stores and anything I could ever ask for. What are some things you don't really like about LA? I see what you mean. What did you study at school? How did you decide to do that? Will and desire to want to get involved with the music. Are you still working on that? No. What's your dream job? Open up a health practice of some sort. What made you decide to do that? Changing things in my life that had an impact on myself and others for the benefit of health. What's great? I'm sure you can tell by my shoes. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? What do you enjoy about traveling? I'd love to hear about one of your trips. What's your favorite thing about LA? Well, I used to go to LA. I used to go to Texas every year with my dad during the summer. And I always wanted to stay there and live there when I went on vacation. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Most likely one of these trips to Texas, where we would go and spend time in the desert and shoot guns and ride go-karts and stuff like that. That sounds like a great situation. It was. It was. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Let's see. Well, my dad and I are not really talking that much. My mom passed away about two months ago. I'm sorry to hear that. Thanks. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Definitely more shy. Always been that way. Why? Just the personality that I've grown into. But learning how to adjust to the sensitivity and grow out of it. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank's green savers. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? I like tea and eating. I like to eat. That calms me down. How are you at controlling your temper? Not that good. When I get really upset, it's usually a problem, and I have to work to calm myself down. Sometimes I just don't get on something and I don't stop. Has that gotten you in trouble? Sometimes, but I've learned to control it to that extent now. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? Yesterday. I was arguing about what kind of water we should be drinking. Why? Well, a difference of opinion, and I felt as though my opinion was very valid, even though I was a little bit more shy. I think the other party's opinion was somewhat misinformed. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. Definitely, every day is a growing process. I wish I would have handled everything differently every day, which is what makes me grow, and I try to work toward how I would have wanted to handle things. Little by little. Okay. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Um, can't think of anyone right now. What's something you feel guilty about? Um... I'd say... I'd say... I'd say not supporting my friends as much with their career choices. Can you tell me about that? I'd rather not get into it. Okay. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? The raw food educators on YouTube, and raw vegan educators, and the detox therapy experts have been really inspirational in the past two months. Tell me more about that. Well, they believe that the essence of all nutrition comes from the raw fruits and vegetables, and this is true with many studies like T. Colin Campbell, the China study, and these sources of information that are very good, and I think deserve respect based on, you know, real research. Um... How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Really easy. I've almost got it down to a science. That's good. What are you like when you don't sleep well? I'm tired. How do you feel about your health? How have you been feeling lately? I've been feeling better than I have in a long time. Can you tell me about that? Uh, yeah. I think it's due to the transition in the diet, and in no way having a placebo effect that it's actually, you know, loosening up toxins and things that have accumulated over my short lifetime of, you know, toxic choices with food, and... drugs or whatever it would be. Mm-hmm. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? Yes. I'm less tense and less irritable, and I have more clarity and more control over my decisions and my wants versus what I need. That sort of thing. That's great. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? Nope. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Yes, to some extent. How long ago were you diagnosed? Over five years ago. What got you into the health? Um, lack of motivation and basically my symptoms were paralleling that of depression. What were your symptoms? Uh, loss of appetite, loss of motivation. Not wanting to do anything. Not wanting to be social at all. Having fear of social situations. And, uh, that was the main, like, four or five. Do you still go to therapy now? No. Why did you stop? I believe I overcome the chapter in my life that was the doctor, um, you know, taking control of my health. And experimenting with drugs. And I just sort of took another route which was alternative. And I started juicing more and, um, just trying to listen to maybe what I needed with the help of, uh, the internet and nutrition experts and stuff like that. Mm-hmm. Do you feel like therapy's useful? Yes. Can you tell me about that? Uh, I believe therapy is useful because, um, um, without looking inward or having somebody to help you do that, um, it's very hard to readjust to some of these problems that you can have that will just, uh, resonate in the subconscious until you, you know, it has an outburst. Basically, um, therapy, um, will help in overall health and mental health, I believe. For everybody. Yeah. Tell me about the last time you felt really bad. What made you really happy? Last night, um, I made a really great vegan, uh, dinner with, you know, meat tacos and cheese and guacamole and had a couple of my friends over and they really liked it a lot. I almost converted them. That's great. Yeah. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? Uh, I would say, uh, Uh, I would say, uh, you know, trying to listen to my inner conscious more than what my brain wants me to do. Like, my brain likes caffeine and sugar, whereas, you know, our body needs, uh, something other than that. That's an example. How hard is that? It's very, very hard. It's a daily process. Tell me about a time when someone made you feel really badly about yourself. Uh, I was, uh, handling money for, uh, a business partner and they ended up short and I was to blame, but it was actually my formulas of crunching the numbers that it made it short, but he was unaware of the change I made to the formula. So, the blame was on me that I may have took money and I automatically felt bad about that because of my, uh, my uncertainty to the change of formula. Yeah. Is there anything you regret? Um, no. No. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? 20 years ago, I was 2 years old. 10 years ago, I was 12 years old. I would tell myself to, um, to start eating raw foods. I would eat fruits and vegetables every day. Okay. How would your best friend describe you? As calm and, um, sad maybe, smart, talented. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Um, I really enjoyed going to the, uh, wholesale food market in downtown Los Angeles. Can you tell me about that? Um, lots of food, uh, great prices. You can eat and feed a whole family for a third of the price as going to a normal supermarket. So, uh, I, I really get a lot of enjoyment at teaching people how to, uh, eat. And, uh, maybe better themselves, especially food-wise, what they're eating. Awesome. What are some things that usually put you in a good mood? Eating and, um, watching a really good TV show. Okay. What would you say are some of your best qualities? Um, I'm insightful. I can, uh, I can adjust to people's, uh, I don't know, I guess I'll skip that question for now. Okay. What are you most proud of in your life? I'm most proud of, um, um, I'd say my overall situation with where I'm at right now. I could have never imagined that I'd be in such a fortunate, um, situation. That's so good to hear. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Goodbye. Hmm. I'm not sure if I can answer that question. Yeah, I think she's done. Can you take the head, too, off? Yeah, we can. Yeah, she did. I was going to ask this.