Bye-bye. Thank you. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I'm just creating a talk to people in space and to share in my life. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people, and I'd love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get started. And please feel free to contact me. Your answers are a total compliment. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing really good. That's good. Where are you from originally? I'm from Granada Hills, California. It's the San Fernando Valley, part of Los Angeles. Cool. What are some things you really like about LA? I love the weather. I like the diversity in people. I like how you can go to a neighborhood, and it's not just one race or kind of food. I love the beaches, all the activities you could go do, theme parks, aquariums, stuff like that, museums. What are some things you don't really like about LA? The smog. There's a lot of creepy guys. I'm kidding. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes, I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? I've pretty much traveled around LA. I've been cross-countrying back three times. Twice was when I was 17. Wow. What do you enjoy about traveling? I like meeting new people and trying different foods and seeing how other people live. I'd love to go to a new place. When I was 17, I ran away with my boyfriend to upstate New York. I went from New York to Watertown. It was like a Navy Army kind of town. We had an apartment there. It snowed a lot. We sold antiques for a living. Awesome. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Getting passes, press passes for the Sunset Strip Music Festival. Getting passes, press passes for the Sunset Strip Music Festival. Through a friend. And getting to meet rock stars and hang out at like the private parties. That sounds like a great situation. Do you consider yourself one shy or outgoing? I'm very outgoing. I love people. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the 15 screen savers. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? I go to the gym and work out quite a bit. I find it helps relieve stress and keeps my energy level going. I notice if I don't work out a couple days, I feel a little more tired than normal. It just helps me feel good. How are you at controlling your hunger? I'm pretty good at it. I'm very calm. I've worked a lot of events and jobs where you're dealing with like, thousands of people a day and people you need to talk to and you have to remain calm. And you know, they're the customer, so you have to make them feel wanted and good and realize that you're getting paid because of the money they're spending. So I'm good at resolving like consumer conflicts and stuff on the job. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone? What was it about? I had a drunk friend that was just falling around. And yelling and saying rude things to people. And I kind of started getting loud, like just telling her to stop doing that. And that she was embarrassing and what she was saying to people was very mean, you know. And I wonder, like, if you're talking to people like that, they might not like it and they could attack you or something. You know, you never know. It is LA. Yeah. That sucks. What's something you feel guilty about? I really don't feel guilty about anything. Decisions I've made in my life. I think I've made really good decisions. And I always stick with my moral compass, what I'm doing. I grew up in church, so I haven't gone in years, but I still have those values. And you know, the rules, the Ten Commandments and stuff in my head. Tell me about a situation that you would see a general differently. I had a slumlord landlord. And I wish that I called, you know, the proper authorities and followed through on a court case instead of letting him, like, kind of bully me out because it wasn't up to code. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had. A few years back, I was dating a guy. And he wanted me to move back to where he was from. And after a few months, you know, he was coming to L.A. and going back home. I decided to move there. And I had just started, you know, this business I was doing, event planning, was picking up. And I decided to leave there and try to do it there and, you know, on the East Coast. And it didn't work out. But it was tough deciding, like, should I leave L.A. and make this jump and try something new and experience something new or stay in what I was doing. What did you study at school? I had a degree in dental assisting. I did that for, like, a year. I didn't like it. And then I was studying communications, like radio and television broadcasting and journalism. Are you still working on that? Somewhat. I'm doing event work. And I wrote for a magazine a couple years. And I'm trying to, like, get a website going and then have, like, where I'm controlling my own writing and what's going on instead of, you know, doing it. You know, writing for someone else. How did you decide to do that? I always wanted to write and was always into the news and music and art growing up. I really liked Connie Chung. She was, like, a Channel 4 newscaster in the 80s. And I loved Barbara Walters. That's great. I was a nerd, no. How did you find your passion? Tell me about your relationship with your family. My sister, she doesn't talk to any of the family. And I have a good relationship with my mom. I never really knew my dad. It doesn't bother me. I have cousins and stuff, but everyone's scattered across the country. So I don't really talk to them on the phone. We just communicate on Facebook or, like, Twitter. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Oh, I go right to sleep. When I get tired, I just go to sleep. How have you been feeling lately? Pretty good and energetic. I've been motivated to go look for more event work, you know, event planning stuff, and really grinding it more than I was. How hard is that? I mean, it's kind of hard because you've got to talk to people. And get them to trust you and see that you could plan events and meet people and convince them why they should pay you to do their event than someone else. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. I mean, I'm generally pretty happy unless something devastating happens, like someone gets cancer or someone I know dies. I wouldn't say that I'm just super, like, oh, my God, happy all the time, but it's, like, an even keel that I feel pretty good all the time. Yeah. What would you say is your best quality? I'm very talkative and friendly, and I could approach strangers and talk to them at ease. And I could adapt to different situations. And even if it's not my scene or situation or a group of people that I'm used to, I could still jump in, talk to people and be comfortable and make friends and adapt. Uh-huh. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? I want to make more money. Me, too. Tell me about a time when someone made you feel really badly about yourself. I remember in, like, second grade, people used to make fun of me because I was very tall and skinny, and I had, like, straight As, we're in the highest grades in the class, so people would make fun of me and call me giraffe or stuff like that. Yeah. How would your best friend describe you? Very talkative. She would just say that I talk to everyone. And that I'm very friendly, and if you need help, that I'll help someone, you know. Tell me about something you've done recently that you really enjoy. Oh, recently I went up to Oceanside and visited a friend I've known years, and we just went out for burgers and hung out. We hung out on the beach, and we got her two-year-old son and, like, took him to the park and played. And it was really nice, and it was cool visiting her. I hadn't seen her in six months, and it was really fun, and I want to go again. And I like the area. What's something you feel guilty about? I guess maybe I can't say. I could be trying to find my own work more, like, for my business instead of working for other people. I think I pursue it, but I think maybe I could put a little more time a day into it. Tell me about McDonald's or something that you wish you could, like, come and learn. I don't really know. I don't know. I don't know anything, like, that I would want to erase or not happen. Okay. Is there anything you're nervous about? No, I feel good about my choices I've made, and I think I'm on the right path. And a lot of things I wanted to do, the ball's rolling, and I'm, you know, getting things done. I'm not as big as I want to be, but I feel like I'm on my way there. Yeah. What advice would you give yourself? How would you tell yourself, like, 10 or 20 years ago? Like, 10 years ago, I would have told myself to work more in the daytime instead of going out as much as I was. What's some of the positive influence you have on yourself? My friend we call Mojo. Can you tell me about that? Mojo has a magazine, and I just wrote years. And he really pushes me to, like, keep writing and keep doing events and keep on the ball I'm rolling. And he's one of the biggest people, you know, in my life. Telling me, you're talented. You could do it. You know, he's just a really good, like, motivation for me. That's great. What are you most proud of in life? You know, being published. I've been on TV shows and just getting my own event thing going. And I have a lot of people who read what I write every day and follow along. I just think it's a, you know, it's not exactly, honey, where I want to be, but it's a great start. And I work to get to that point. Yeah. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Great. Thanks. Bye. Thank you.