Okay. Thanks. Thanks. Hello. Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? Okay, not too bad. I'm from Chicago, Southside. Back in 1978, when I was 18. That's a long time. How often do you go back to your hometown? How does it compare to LA? Why do you miss LA? Let's see. My mother had moved to Africa. I graduated from high school. And I had a friend out here. So I just thought, well, let me try LA. Okay. How easy was it for you to get used to living in LA? Very easy, actually, yeah. I loved it from the moment I got off the airplane. Yeah. What are some things you really like about LA? Number one, the weather. Sun is very important to me. So I love the weather. I don't know. Just kind of a more laid-back atmosphere. Variety of people. And now it's my home base, you know. My friends that are family. Family. So. It's kind of like my family is here now. What are some things you really like about LA? Hmm. I guess the smog. Earthquakes. Traffic. Just basic things like that, really. Yeah. I'm sure you can tell by my students. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? I don't currently, but I did throughout my life. I travel quite a lot. What do you enjoy about traveling? Just seeing other cultures and seeing more history and meeting people and just the fun of it as well. I'd love to go to LA with friends. I'd love to go to LA with friends. I'm not sure I'm going to go. Let's see. Well, one trip, I went to England, Ireland and Scotland and France. All in, you know, one trip. So that was a nice variety. Nice. What's one of your most memorable things? I guess you could say probably skiing. Skiing in Val d'Isere, France. That was fun. I'm glad I got to do that. That's great. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? I'm kind of shy by nature. I've tried to grow out of being shy, so I'm not fully shy, but I was always an extremely shy child. Yeah. But now here in Culver City, this is my environment and I guess you could say I'm not really shy in my hometown of Culver City. Yeah. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the bedtime screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? To relax? I like to just curl up in my bed and read my book. Take a nap. Watch TV. Sometimes on the couch in the living room. Just, you know, stay at home and kind of vegetate. How are you at controlling your temper? Pretty good. Yeah. My temper is pretty level. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? Hmm. Yeah. Probably with my husband and I can't remember at the moment what it was about. Okay. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Well, when you say my family, do you mean my family from childhood or my current family? My current family. Okay. Well, I guess my current family comes to mind. I have two daughters and my relationship's pretty good. It's okay with them, but they're teenagers, which, you know, they're going through a lot of hormones and they can be kind of bitchy. And... But I have hope that, you know, they'll grow up. They'll grow out of that and someday we'll have a really good relationship. And then there's the husband, which I guess I could say soon to be ex-husband. Hopefully soon. We need to get a divorce, but we're still together due to financial reasons. And yeah. Yeah. So that's not good, the relationship with the husband. But since we have determined that we need to divorce, we don't expect anything out of each other, so we don't argue as much. So that's good. Yeah. Tell me about a situation that you went through and they went differently. Hmm. Well, I guess our marriage. I wish I had noticed early on that, you know, it was like way off from what I thought it was. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Let's see. Oh my God. Yeah. Well, that's a good question. Hardest decision? I guess leaving my first husband, that was pretty hard. Can you tell me about that? Well, you know, we were married and I wasn't content, I guess you could say. And I kind of just gave up on our relationship. Now that I look back, I think it's because I wanted children and he would have been happy to never have any. And so since I didn't have a father, it was very important that I create children with someone who really wanted to be a father. And so I was kind of at an age where I needed to start thinking about having children. Yet I didn't. I was with someone who really was not into it. So I think that's one, maybe the core reason why I was not content and I just felt like this marriage isn't going to work. So, you know, we went to therapy and everything and he did not want to break up. And I had to leave him because I just wasn't happy. And that was very hard. Because, you know, I felt like I was hurting him, which I was. You know, he survived. He got over it. Now he's married with two kids. But it was hard to leave him. Tell me about Nivelle or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Hmm. Something I wish I could erase from my memory. I have to think about that. I'm sure there's something. Oh, well. Yeah, there's, I guess it would be nice to erase from my memory a recent, not recent, but an event. In my recent adulthood here in Culver City where one of my best friends betrayed me by, back years ago when my husband first got into real estate. She and her family were growing and they really needed a larger home. And, um. Yeah. We just assumed, you know, that they would use my husband as their agent both to sell their current home, current at the time, and to purchase a new home. And as it turned out, they surprised us and had been talking to this other local agent. And, uh, yeah. That was devastating. I don't think I had ever been betrayed like that. Yeah. So I wish I could erase that. Now, because now, you know, this was back when the kids were really young. And, um, my daughter at the time, my youngest daughter was, let's say, six maybe. Um, maybe five. Anyway, her and my best friend's daughter are the same age. They were born within days of each other. We were pregnant together. And, um, they were really tight, those two little girls. And they ended up not going to the same elementary school. So they didn't get to hang out during those years. But every time we'd run into them in the neighborhood or they'd run into each other at a summer camp or something, they were just so connected. They were just, you know, like two peas in a pod. Even though their moms weren't talking to each other anymore. So now they're 13 and 14. And they're in middle school together. And they're still very connected. In fact, she for the first time spent the night at our house last night with my daughter and another girl. And it's just a little awkward, you know, because now these girls are becoming really good friends, better friends. Um, and yet I still have this vivid, um, bad memory of what her, her mom did to, to me. That was about, what, 10, about eight years ago. Anyway. I tried, I tried to ignore it and put it out of my head, which I've been able to in recent years. But obviously, I'm not going to do that. But obviously, it still comes up. Anyway. That, that was that. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Um, not that easy. I do sometimes get a decent night's sleep. But sometimes it's hard to get to sleep. And most of the time I wake up and can't get back to sleep. Or I finally get back to sleep. And then it's almost time to get up. You know, that, that's a difficult thing. Are you triggered by something? Well, the waking up in the middle of the night is definitely triggered by having to go to the bathroom. And then, um, you know, it's not always that easy to get back to sleep. And then I wake up again to go to the bathroom. So I guess that's the trigger. As far as getting to sleep, having a hard time there. I don't know. I think there's just too much on my mind. Running through my mind in the day. And I feel like I haven't accomplished enough during the day. So it's hard for me to just go to sleep when I'm supposed to. I guess. Okay. What are you like when you wake up in the morning? Um. Um. Well, I'm kind of used to it now. I just go on through the day. Probably looking, looking tired. And, um, I'm kind of used to feeling tired. I just do what I need to do. And sometimes if I'm able to, if I'm at home and don't have huge commitments, yeah, I might just, like I said earlier, just take a nap or something. Read my book. Watch TV. Whatever. I just do what I need to do. Mm-hmm. What have you been feeling lately? Lately, how have I been feeling? Um. Kind of down on myself. Down on life. Can you tell me about that? Well, I have this pending need for separation slash death. Divorce. Um. I'm worried that I made a lot of mistakes with my girls. Now they're teenagers. You know, on the verge of adulthood. And so I worry that, you know, I did all kinds of things wrong with their guidance and their early childhood. And now it's too late. Um. Like I missed out on a lot of things. Uh. And, yeah. I need a job. I'm unemployed. I don't know what I want to do with my life. I know I want to do something. I just wish, you know, I never did finish college, unfortunately, because I was traveling and stuff. So I regret that extremely. And I need to get a job and be able to take care of myself because I need to divorce and move on with my life. So. Now I forget what the original question was. But, yeah. Um. That's the state, part of the state of my life. Okay. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with the symptoms? Yes. Okay. How long ago were you diagnosed? Um. Well, the first time or recently? The first time, I guess, was, you know, when I was in my early 20s. I was just a little upset about, coincidentally, that was another breakup I had to make back then. I was in my early 20s. And I needed to break up with my boyfriend. But, again, it was very upsetting because I, you know, it was hard because he didn't want to break up. And I felt like I was hurting him. And I didn't understand this feeling. I was really upset. And I didn't, that was my first time having depression. So I didn't really recognize it as depression. But I went, somehow I had the knowledge or the, I was able to get it. I was able to take myself to a psychiatrist. I remember I paid for her by the hour. And she prescribed Xanax to just help relax me. And so I guess that helped me get through that. And then I've had depression throughout the years. Just, you know, little bits here and there for various reasons such as, I guess it's usually a relationship, you know. Yeah, so the most recent time I was diagnosed and put on meds, that was probably about two years ago. Do you still go to therapy now? No. Why did you stop? Money. I don't have insurance. Otherwise, yeah, I'd be happy to go to therapy. Anyway. Anything that might help. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Ooh. Boy. Last time I felt really happy. I don't know. I guess maybe when my children were born. That's... I guess happy. I don't know. I just, you know, I always wanted children. So it was nice to have them. That's, I don't know, that's all I can remember of that. I guess I don't remember the good times too well. I remember the bad times. Yeah. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Hmm. Something I did that I really enjoyed. Well. I think I was in a relationship with a friend. I don't know. I don't know. Let's see. I, Friday night I went to a friend's house and met up with five other girlfriends and we created vision boards and talked and had dinner at one of their house. That was fun. That sounds like a great situation. Yeah. We get to... What advice did you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? I don't know. I think I would say, stay in college, get my degree, get therapy, try to become happy. Yeah. Try to figure out things earlier in life. Yeah. And I think that's what I would say. Like, yeah. Stay in college and, oh, and mainly, I think the mean, you know, what it all boils down to, no matter what you're depressed about, it seems like as the saying goes and the songs go, you know, it's all about money. The world revolves around money and having none. That in itself is very depressing. So besides relationships and different things that have happened in your life, having no money is, you know, it's like you can't even try to fix anything because you don't have the money to fix it. So with that in mind, I would definitely advise myself to get my college degree and to get a job and stick with it. Don't quit to go traveling, you know. Just stick with the job. Stick with the company. Build up your seniority. Keep your benefits. And build up some knowledge or some expertise in some sort of field. Yeah. That would have been my biggest piece of advice to myself. Okay. What are your most proud of in life? Not much. I guess just my daughters, you know. They're beautiful daughters and I'm proud and glad that I was able to have children. Some people aren't even able to do that, you know, and they try so hard or they look back on their life and they wish they had done it. So that's the one thing that I would say. I mean, I wanted five children and I always wanted a boy, which I never had, but I guess that's the biggest thing I can think of to be proud of, having my two daughters. What would you say of the women that follow you? I'm a very loyal friend and person. That's why when that friend betrayed me, it was so devastating. Yeah. Very loyal. Very happy. What was I going to say? I was going to say happy go lucky. I don't know where that came from. Very, I meant to say friendly and caring and yeah, I care about people and I'm interested in people. I don't care about animals either. I just try to be kind to the people and I care about animals as well. Actually, that's another thing I'm proud of. I'm proud of being a vegetarian. Yeah, so my daughters and being vegetarian and I'm a vegetarian because I really care about feelings of other beings, not only humans, but animals too and you know, I don't think that animals should be tortured or harassed,áo and live a torturous life just so we can eat them. So what was the question? Do you remember the question? Okay. Okay. You're welcome. Bye. I did need the tissue one time, so that's good. Thank you.