Okay. Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing good. That's good. Where are you from originally? I'm originally from Southern California. Really? What are some things you really like about L.A.? I like the downtown theater district. I like the beaches. I like the variety of stuff that you can do in one day. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? Well, sometimes I don't like the traffic. I don't think there's really too much I don't like about L.A. I really do like L.A., though. Okay. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? No, I haven't really traveled in about five years. Why? Oh, I just haven't been able to travel. I just haven't traveled. Okay. What do you enjoy about traveling? I like going to new places. I like going to new places. I like seeing things I haven't seen before. And if I can, like visiting places like landmarks. I'd love to hear about one of your trips. Well, the last one I did was San Francisco. That wasn't so far. But I got to stay in downtown San Francisco, and I got to go shopping. And I got to get on the streetcar. So that was cool. Nice. What did you study at school? Well, I still study. I'm studying psychology. That sounds interesting. How did you decide to do that? Hmm. Well, I decided to go back to school just pretty quickly. So I went to junior college. And then when it got close to graduate, I knew I wanted to transfer. So I'd taken a couple of psychology courses, and I decided I liked it. So I just decided to make that my major. And I thought it didn't have a lot of math, but it had enough math. Yeah. Are you happy with it, though? Hmm. Well, now that I'm almost done, I don't know if I'm going to continue in that area. I understand. What's your dream job? Well, what I wanted initially was to get into sports psychology. But I'm not quite sure that's what I want either. Okay. Can you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Well, I could be shy initially, but once you get to know me, I'm outgoing. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank screen saver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best-saved guy. What do you do to relax? Uh. I think I either go to sleep, eat something really, really good, or watch something on Netflix. Like what? Well, just a good movie. I like foreign movies a lot. So a lot of, right now I'm into martial arts movie with subtitles, so. Cool. How are you at controlling your hunger? I think I'm pretty good. When was the last time you argued with someone? Hmm. You know, I know they're not really long arguments. I don't know if they're real arguments. I know I argued with my boyfriend because he hung up on my face. I don't know why. And it got solved pretty quickly. So I don't know if it was really that important. Okay. Wait. I walked out without saying. Oh, okay. You wish you were able to differently. Hmm. I can't think of one right now. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. I think the hardest decision I probably had to make was moving from, well, back to California, from Oregon. Can you tell me about that? Well, I was really young. So I was 19, 20-ish. And I was really by myself. So that was pretty hard because I obviously had to support myself. Okay. And what made you decide to do that? Because it was really, really boring in Oregon. So I really liked the activity here in LA. I see what you mean. What's something you feel guilty about? You know, I don't really feel guilty about many things. Okay. Tell me about your relationships with your family. Well, I don't talk to them that much. My dad, my stepmom live in Oregon. So I probably talk to them on the phone at least once or twice a month. And then when they come out here, I want to say at least once a year. Sometimes it can be twice, you know, occasionally more, but not too often. Then I see them. That's about it. But I'm pretty much the only one out here. My brother is also up there as well. Yeah. Okay. And what's your favorite person in your life? Just someone that's been a positive influence in your life. Well, I've had lots of positive influences, I think. Just regular people I come across, you know, maybe someone I've worked with. Maybe, oh, actually my uncle. He's a really good positive influence. He knows quite a bit, has lots of good advice. Like what? About life. Okay. Tell me about New Balance or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Hmm. You know, I don't really think I've had anything that bad happen to me where I just don't, where it bothers me so much I have to not think about it. Okay. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Pretty, well, I can't say pretty easy because I work a hot schedule and then I go to school, but, yeah, if I want to go to sleep, I sleep really well, though, as long as I have enough, you know, hours. That's good. How have you been feeling lately? Really, really happy and good. That's so good. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? Nope. Have you been diagnosed with a disease? No. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. I'm always happy. Oh, gosh, yesterday. Can you tell me about that? I'm just happy. Anytime I talk to my boyfriend or if I go out and do something, I'm just happy. I got off work, I'm happy because I'm done for the day. I'm just really happy. I'm on spring break. I'm really happy right now, so. Awesome. So, what's your favorite thing about your life? I like to do the most, but I don't have a favorite thing about my life. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Hmm. Oh, I haven't done, like, any really extremely fun activities, unless you consider going out to eat. But the last activity that I had a lot of fun doing was ice skating in December in downtown L.A. Wow. And I want to do that. Is there anything you regret? No, I don't really have too many regrets. I mean, whatever happens, happens, and, you know, it was meant to play out that way. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Hmm. Well, um, I guess I would say don't worry too much about the small things. Um, even though they seem really big, it really is a little bit. they really are insignificant and you won't think about it six months from now. Okay. What would you say are some of your best qualities? I think my best qualities are I'm a happy person, I'm a fun person, I'm pretty easy to get along with. I think most people like me and I'm just a cool person. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? Well, I wish I could study more. I wish I would study more. I wish that I would exercise more and I wish that that's yeah I think that's it right there. Tell me about a time when someone made you feel really bad about yourself. I don't think I want to talk about that. Okay. What are your most proud of in your life? Hmm. I don't know. I guess just taking care of myself, supporting myself, not having to go back home. I guess that's about the best accomplishment there. That's great. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thank you. Goodbye. Bye. Okay. Was that you on the other end? No. Actually, I'll explain a little bit more about how it works after you've done with this. Cool. Okay. Okay. All right. So you can move back over to that computer. We'll have you do a quick post survey. Okay. All right. All right. I'll see you in a minute.