Oh, so she's like going to be a counselor, kind of. So now, give us your OP for a bit, and then this side, when she's done, she will let you know. And then I just press that? Right here? Yep, you press that button. All right, thank you. And then we just have that again, and then we're done? Yep. Cool. All right, cool. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I'm free to talk to people in this way. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people, and I'd love to learn about you. I'll ask you a few questions, then we'll start. And please feel free to comment on anything. Your answers are very convenient. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. I'm actually I feel pretty good because I uh I slept all day yesterday almost and I usually I'm doing something if it's not work it's school if it's not school it's work and then social life and all that so um I actually didn't have work yesterday and I don't have school I only have school on the weekdays so I actually slept probably like 85 percent of the day so I actually feel kind of good but I'm actually kind of tired as well I have other stuff going on but other than that I'm good today. Okay where are you from originally? I'm originally from Bakersfield, California. Really? Really. When did you move to LA? I moved to LA when I was an infant and I left here when I was around three or four and I've been moved I've moved back here in 07 and I've been living here um ever since. How often do you go back to your hometown? Um wow since I've been here since 07 I've only been back maybe maybe like a couple times well I went there for like a summer like in 08 I think I was there for like almost the whole summer but I've only been back a couple times um since I've been back here unfortunately. Uh uh uh it compares to LA um it doesn't really compare to LA. I grew up in Sacramento actually I didn't get to tell you I was born in Bakersfield and I lived here and then anyways I don't know if I did I forgot anyways um yeah there's like nothing really to do there it's really small it's the valley um LA has all this stuff to do has um oceans and it's by all kinds of um located by a lot of cool places like Vegas and San Diego and what have you not um but yeah other than that I miss my friends and stuff but I don't miss like the actual city. I just miss some of the people that I grew up with. Yeah. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes I'm not much of a world explorer do you travel a lot? Oh I can't see your shoes but um I don't travel a lot actually I've only been out of California like six times so I would like to travel once I uh have enough money to do so. Okay. What's your study at school? Um. Well originally I wanted to be a filmmaker in which I still want to be a filmmaker and I um I was I took communications and um did general ed stuff too and um took like video production classes and um did a lot of stuff in regards to um filmmaking and I have learned a lot of stuff and I still have that knowledge however I haven't really used it since I've been back here in LA I did all that stuff in Northern California and Sacramento but um and then I transferred, switched over to food at school and then after that I picked my career and did my f appeal. to be to business which I took some classes in that but now I'm actually studying to be an optician and I'm actually almost done with schooling and getting ready to try to get in the field and become an optician so but I do want to be a I actually still wanted to be a filmmaker and that's still one of my plans and I still actually I got into playing poker a few years ago and I really like the idea of becoming a full-time filmmaker or a full-time poker player however both of those jobs are extremely difficult to make a living out of and you have to be like the small percent so we'll see if not then hopefully my optician career could take me somewhere to be optician oh um uh I guess I would just try to find something that it was like it's like a trade it's well it's a private college but it just like specifically trains you into um one of the things that I'm really passionate about is that I'm really passionate about one field and you just learn that you don't do like your GE and all these other classes like you normally do for like um like a major or whatever you're going to do so it just trains you specifically to be optician and jump in the field I um took it just because I actually want to be a dental assistant it sounded like something maybe I could do it sounds interesting but then the counselor actually um got my attention to be optician so I'm now trying to be an optician and it's interesting so it's fun it's um really hard but it's interesting and it and it um and it's it's fun it has um rewarding um rewarding benefits as far as like being able to help people see better and feel comfortable with glasses or contact lenses whatever they feel more comfortable with that's great cool I'm definitely outgoing however I can be shy sometimes like I'm kind of shy right now because I'm talking to you and you're in the computer and you're a cartoon or I animated it or whatever so cool but no usually 98 percent I turn on the 15 screen savers hey I know it's not Hawaii but it's the best I've got um I actually which is actually kind of funny and I think maybe this might go for some of the poker players too um I don't really I've never really talked to any professional poker players but as far as like um I actually playing poker is um actually something that helps me forget about anything as far as like um stuff in the past or present or future stuff that's coming up uh as far as like I am really relaxed I really um could just not think about anything and just think about poker and it actually it's kind of like a therapy thing for me because I don't really think about anything but I'm like i guess you could say it's a kind of drug because um i don't think about anything as far as like stressed out or depressed or stuff that's happened in the past i just like focus on poker so it's actually kind of relieving however playing poker is very stressful on top of that so i guess it's kind of like a catch-22 or whatever but uh yeah so no poker i like to play basketball i like to watch movies i like to go to the beach actually one of the things i like to do is go to the beach because it does um it makes me feel good but i didn't go i usually only go to the beach when it's hot not during the cold season so it's coming up soon so i'm looking forward to that i'm gonna be busy but uh i'll try to go to the beach as much as i can um i'm really good at controlling my temper actually i've only been in like i'm 30 years old i've been in like six fights maybe and all six of them were started by the other person so i've never started a real fight in my whole life like i started fights when i was a little kid but i'm talking about like real stuff like once you get past like 13 14 um but yeah no i'm good like every now and then like there's been a couple times maybe in the past where like i wasn't able to control it but um as far as like ever being violent or anything that's never occurred and never would but for um majority of the time yeah i don't have like people do stupid things all the time and i just like let it go especially like um on the freeway and stuff but uh oh well i mean i agreed about with my ex-girlfriend a lot but um it was just about really um petty things i guess that maybe we just i think we were good for each other but uh maybe some other lifetime because um we just bumped heads too much so obviously she's my ex-girlfriend probably for a reason so we just argued about girlfriend boyfriend girlfriend boyfriend girlfriend boyfriend girlfriend thing i guess my filming um there's a lot of stuff i gotta handle differently but uh uh maybe like when i was doing really good when i was younger and i was um working for Production assistant for filmmakers around where I lived in Sacramento. So I was doing everything that I wanted to do as far as my dreams were concerned. And I had a lot, all my stuff together. I had my own car, my own apartment. And then I got involved with like the wrong group of people, I guess. And kind of tumbled downhill from there and like lost everything, like car, job, apartment. So I just wish that maybe I never got involved with those kind of people, that kind of girl. But ever. Because I would have, my life would probably be a lot different now. However, I believe that anything happens for a reason. And obviously I think you should also like stuff that happens, good or bad. But learn from your mistakes. So when it happens again, you could not make that mistake or try not to make it as bad. Yeah, so, you know. Tell me about the hardest experience. The hardest decision you've ever had to make. I guess. I guess, hardest decision. The hardest decision I have ever had to make would be. I guess you could say, I don't really know. I guess I would say that maybe like my ex-girlfriend. Like I could have like stayed with her. And I really like still am in love with her. And would like to be with her and miss her. But I guess the biggest decision that I had to make was like I know that it wasn't like a healthy relationship. And I know if we like stayed together or if we got married or had kids that I don't think it would end up working out anyways. So I guess the decision, my hardest decision would be. To like actually stay away from her and not get back with her. And be not with her. So I guess that was a hard, really hard decision. Because I could easily have done it. And I guess maybe I would have been happier in that way. But stressed out and irritable or whatever. And the other way of having to deal with her, I guess. Deal with each other, our relationship. So it was really hard. Still is. So I guess that's it. Not choosing to be with someone that I loved and loved me. Or whatever. Cool. What was that? I beg your pardon? Nevada? Nevada? I don't understand the first part of that question. Oh, an event. Oh, an event. Okay. That I could erase. That I could erase from my memory. My ex-girlfriend. I wish I had never met her. My first girlfriend and my last girlfriend. I wish I never met them. Because we were together in love for a few years. And then we broke up. And it was really hard. So I guess both of them. How easy is it for you to get a good husband? Oh, extremely easy. I could fall asleep anywhere. Actually, the other day I broke a record. I almost fell asleep standing up. Which would have been weird. Because I guess I would have fallen down or something. I don't know. I just caught myself. I mean, I was really tired. But I do a lot of stuff. So it's hard. I don't really get that much sleep. As much as I would like. But I could sleep when I'm dead. Or whatever. As they say. Do you have any issues lately? Have you been diagnosed with depression? How have you been feeling lately? How do you cope with that? Well, I'm a religious person. I'm Catholic. I believe in God. I know there's a God. So I've obviously even devoted people to God. Regardless of what they are. They sometimes lose faith. So I do lose faith sometimes. But it doesn't really last for that long. And I know that there is a God. And I know that I'll be okay. And everything will be okay. But it's hard. I don't really. I just keep going. I go to school and work. And I just have to keep going. I can't give up. So I just try. I stay busy. And staying busy helps kind of. And like sleeping a lot helps. But I don't get to sleep a lot. So I don't know. Playing poker. Playing basketball. Helps me deal with it. Hanging out with my friends helps me sometimes. Why? How do you feel about the last time you felt really happy? I felt really happy on Friday. Because. I went to San Diego for the first time. And I didn't. It wasn't as cool as I thought it was going to be. But we're like under circumstances. As far as like. My friend had business to take care of. And it took a long time. So I would much rather been free during that time. But I wasn't. But we had fun. And it was cool. I enjoyed it. So yeah. I really liked. I had fun. And I was happy about going to San Diego for the first time. And I had a good time. That's great. What advice would you give yourself? As a friend of yours. A lot of things. But I guess I would say like. Be nicer to like. Family members. You know. A couple family members. That I wish I would have been different to. Acted different to. Not that I was like horrible. But I could have been nicer in some instances. If I didn't know the situation. At hand. I would. I would have never like really. Went out and partied all the time. Like I did. Like high school. Different part times. Out of high school. I would have just. Really focused on. Schooling and stuff. And then. Did the partying later. Wouldn't have gotten. Relationships that. So I would have just told myself. More. Basically to be more. Have more direction. Be more focused. I guess. Stay away from. People. And unhealthy relationships. Unhealthy people. I guess. Not that I'm the healthiest. But. Yeah. I just would have done a lot of stuff. Different. But. I don't know. I said earlier. But I believe everything happens for a reason. So. I guess. Everything's happening. Now. For a reason. So I'm just going to keep going. What are your best friends? I guess. The few that I do have. Are the few that I used to have. Because I have best friends now. A couple. I guess. One new one. And I've lost a few best friends. As far as like. Just not. We like. Went our own ways. But I guess. They would all probably describe me more. As like. Energetic. Funny. Crazy. Loud. Silly. Smart. And. I just. I guess. In general. Just like. Entertaining. To be around. Have. I haven't always been the best. Bestest. Best friend. But. I try. You know. My hardest. So. That's it. Like. Cool. Um. Changed myself. I wish I was. I wish I was like. Fifteen pounds lighter. Um. I wish. I didn't need. Uh. How do I put this? I feel like. Um. Um. I feel like. I'm a. I feel like. I. I need to be like. In a relationship with a girl. But I feel like. I wish I didn't have to be. Like. Feel like. That I needed to have a girl all the time. And. So I guess. That can help me like. Focus more. And. I wish that like. I didn't need. Sexual. Um. I wasn't always thinking about sexual stuff. Towards girls all the time. As far as like. Me having to be. In a sexual. Thing with them. Like. As far as like. Wanting sex. As much as I do. Because I feel like. If I didn't concentrate. Or have to. Do. Like. Get. Be with girls. Or in a relationship. To like. My whole. I don't know how to say it. But I'm just saying like. There's like. Guy friends that I know. That don't need sex. As much as I do. And I feel like. I need it more than. I feel like. Sometimes that. I wish I didn't. Need it as much. So maybe. I guess I'm addicted to it. A little bit. Where like. I could focus. On more things. Other than just. I mean. I don't just focus on sex. But I just feel like. If I focus on. If I didn't want it. Need it. Or think I need it. As much. That I could get. More stuff done. In my life. But. Yeah. I'm trying. I'm working on that. What am I most proud of? I'm most proud of. I'm most. I guess. I guess I'm most proud of. I'm most proud of. Working for. Television station. Back in Sacramento. And working. On a lot of. Film sets. Because like. I. I was 16. And I decided. I want to be a filmmaker. And then. Two years. Later. Or a year. And a half later. Basically. I got. I started making steps. To become a filmmaker. And. Then I ended up. Working. In the business. And. Working as a filmmaker. For really. Really. Really. Good. Um. Cinema. Photographer. A really good. Um. Freelance cinematographer. That was. That lives in Sacramento. That did a lot of things. So. I'm proud that I. Had a dream. And I went for it. And I. I actually ended up. Doing stuff. To go towards my dream. That were in my dream. So. Um. Yeah. I guess that's one of my biggest. Accomplishments. Which was like. Over 10 years ago. But. I. Hopefully. Something like that. Could happen again soon. Or. Yeah. So. That's great. Okay. I think I've asked everything I've been asked to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts. Perfect. Goodbye. Goodbye. Cool. Alrighty. So now I've got to record. Um. Oh.