a little bit so we can see it. That would be better, yeah. A little bit in the middle. Perfect. That's fine. Great. Thank you. I appreciate it. I'm being charged. Blanca, 408. A mugshot. Yeah. All right. So I'm going to set this up now. There we go. So now I'm going to hand you this. I'm going to put this doorbell right over here. When she's done talking, she'll let you know. And you can push this button to let her know. OK. So I'm supposed to respond, right? Yeah. OK. And I stay right here? I don't know. OK. You can stay just at the front of the room. OK. Cool. All right. Hi. I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get it started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you OK with this? Yes, I am. OK. So how are you doing today? I'm doing great. That's good. Where are you from originally? I am originally from Venezuela. Really? Yes. When did you move to L.A.? I was two years old. You were very young, weren't you? Yes, I was. How often do you go back to your hometown? Been only once. Why? I do not have family there anymore. My siblings live there. I live in Florida nowadays. OK. What are some things you really like about L.A.? Well, there are so many things I like about L.A. I like the weather. I like people. There's a diverse community. Overall, I think the weather. We're very lucky here. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? Traffic. I see what you mean. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes. I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? I have traveled some. What do you enjoy about traveling? Meeting new people and doing new learning about new cultures. I enjoy languages, traveling itself. I'd love to hear about all your trips. I have traveled to Italy. I lived there for seven and a half years. I've studied abroad. I have visited a few countries through Europe. I had a real good time. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Probably traveling to rail along Europe and getting to know cities in that way. Awesome. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Totally outgoing. going. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the Fish Tank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? I do meditation. How did you decide to do that? It's usually a practice that becomes very natural. So my body is able to sense when I'm not feeling at ease and I naturally breathe and start my meditation process. How hard is that? It could be hard if you don't practice that every day or if you're not able to quiet your mind. However, if you meditate for a long time, it becomes very natural. So when it comes to practice, like going to the gym or drinking daily water, you can naturally learn to meditate. How are you at controlling your temper? I think pretty good. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? I typically do not argue. I don't remember any instance of arguing with anyone recently. Okay. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. Maybe being on the freeway and taking the wrong exit. I would have probably paid attention to my probably GPS or not being overconfident. I see what you mean. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Hardest decision I ever had to make. I guess moving back from Europe to LA, coming back home. I miss my friends. What made you decide to do that? It was time to come back. I had done my schooling and it was time to come back home to my parents and join my family. Tell me about your relationship with your family. I love my family. They're the core of my life. I have a nephew. He's six years old and he used to love my life. Loved them all. That's great. So good to hear. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? My teachers, my parents, and definitely my mentors. Okay. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Well, I don't think I have anything that bad that I want to erase from my memory. I can think of any. Sorry. Okay. What's something you feel guilty about? Guilty about? I don't think I have anything to feel guilty about. However, sometimes I feel guilty when I eat a lot of cookies because that is not good for my health. Okay. How easy is it to get rid of your stress? Very easy. I sleep like a baby once I hit the bed. That's good. How have you been feeling lately? I've been feeling good. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? No. Okay. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. I felt really happy about... Two months ago, I went to a friend's birthday. She celebrated in that casino by a city away from Los Angeles, San Bernardino. And I was playing with a 25 cents with quarters and I won like $75 in the machine. So that was very cool. Nice. How would your best friend describe you? Outgoing. Always planning something exciting to do. Very outspoken. Is there anything you regret? Not that I know of, no. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Always do what you want to do. Life is short and always keep on learning. Okay. How have you been feeling lately? I've been feeling good. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? I want to lose two more pounds. Okay. Tell me about a time when someone made you feel really badly about yourself. I've been very, very blessed. I've never really felt anyone make me feel bad. I usually interact well with everyone I meet. And I'm very, very happy. I am very blessed to have everyone be nice to me. That's great. What would you say are some of your best qualities? I'm a great listener. I spend quality time with my friends and family. Not quantity necessarily, but quality time. And I'm very supportive and I love to pretty much listen, listen, and listen. Sometimes that's all people need. What did you study at school? I went to school. I have two degrees. I have a business management degree and also I have a language degree. That sounds interesting. How did you decide to do that? I learned languages when I was very little. I had the opportunity to travel and it was easier for me to keep on learning languages. And the business part, I enjoy interacting with people, creating new ideas, innovating. So I believe that's where my interest in business came from. Are you still working in that? Yes, I am. What's your dream job? My dream job? One that wouldn't have probably challenges every day. One that I could... I don't know, just come to the office and everybody and everything would be perfect, but it's not real. So I think one of the main things about having a job is enjoying those challenges. Yeah. What are you most proud of in your life? Very proud of myself, my accomplishments, and I'm also very proud of my family and my friends and how they have achieved and overcome their obstacles. Can you give me an example of that? Sure. I have a friend of mine who is now at New York State University. She had quite some challenges trying to get there and funding her education. And now she is not only in a school, but she has acquired some funding for her education through a lot of writing letters and petitions and things she did in order to conquer her dream to be in school. So, very proud of her. That's great. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thank you. Goodbye. Goodbye. That was cool. Good. So you can take your headset off now. And I'll stop the recording.