you're saying right this is okay just want to say one thing real quick here oh too late I just want to say okay I miss my recall isn't that good I don't know the time I deal with here last time because when I went back there I didn't ask me questions like recall questions from this so I should try to be aware of like what how I'm answering or which things about her okay okay all right oh I see okay I got you okay well what she say didn't know okay okay I got you all right thank you hi I'm Ellie thanks for coming in today I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment I'm not a therapist but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you I'll ask a few questions to get us started okay and please feel free to tell me anything answers are totally confident okay are you okay with this sure okay so how are you doing today doing okay that's good I'm from LA yeah like the weather I like the sports teams like the entertainment yeah it's pretty much the same year Ron as far as well actually the weather could be good and could be bad you don't get to get all four seasons so it's it's kind of like a mixed bag and I guess it maybe I'm kind of used to it by now so it'd be kind of nice to get to go to LA and then go to the other areas I was there all my life haven't done too much traveling so it's a little bit of a kind of a ruddiness to it but overall it's okay like the computer programming and operations but that's going back to the 70s so it's technology's changed a lot as you can tell in the last 40 odd years that's right that's what else my major yeah um I don't know it's kind of this kind of inquisitive you get to use your mind it was like you know brand new something you know very novel back in the in the old days you know back in the 70s now it's a breeze seemed to computers but back then was sort of like something very unique you didn't see you know too many computers around back then and I was magistrate at this school so I was kind of into the logicalness of it you know putting together you know solving a particular problem you know come up with step-by-step solutions on it. Back then I was kind of more into the analyticalness of the problem. Are you still working on that? No, I kind of phased out. I still use computers, but I haven't been in programming for a long time. Why? Well, I kind of got into another area. I kind of diverged into another area of my life. This is going back to the late 70s. I kind of took another turn and then by the time I kind of got back into it, I kind of got into another field. So I never really pursued it to the degree that I wanted to. Wow. That's a good question. I never thought about that. Well, actually, ironically, actually, it's something pretty simple. At this point in time, this is what maybe I'm kind of a little bit depressed and then at this point I kind of just want to do a nice relaxing job. But I do want somewhat of a challenge, but I don't want to have to do too much thinking. It's almost like the opposite of what I was back in the old days. I just want a nice, comfortable, relaxing job that I can feel fulfillment on, but I don't want to be too tense in the situation. I'm kind of at the point in my life where I just want a nice, relaxing job. Yeah. Yeah. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Oh, I would say, well, for the most part, shy. But sometimes once I get going, I could be outgoing. But generally speaking, I'm shy to begin with. And then at times I can kind of loosen up and be more outgoing. And sometimes I can take it to the extreme where I'm talking too much. Like once the floodgates open up, they kind of open up too much. So I have to back off. But overall, I would say I'm kind of shy is a general demeanor. Okay. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the FistPix screensaver. Oh, really? I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? Well, I listen to music. I watch TV. I watch TV. What do I do? I stay relaxed. Well, I just try to avoid stressful situations. So I kind of stay relaxed. I also talk to my friends, too. I'll be around an area, kind of a comfort area where I feel safe. I can just dialogue with people. So it kind of gets me out of my thinking about my own problems I'm having. I kind of just focus on being in the moment with my friends and acquaintances. How are you at controlling your temper? I'm pretty good. I don't really have a temper. It takes a lot to get me to explode. I think in my younger days, I think I was a little bit more, had a little bit, slight bit of temper. I never had a really bad temper, but temper's not really an issue I have. I tend to be pretty mellow, easy going. That's good. Yeah. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? Wow, that's a good question. I'm not sure to be honest. I didn't think about that for a long time. To be honest, I can't come up with an answer on that. It's not really part of my repertoire. Nothing comes to mind off the top of my head. Okay. Tell me about a situation that you wish you had handled differently. Well, the only thing I think, kind of going way back, I made some bad investments back about 10 years ago. I was more, I'm trying to think of the right word. I'm looking for more trusting of people. Like people who I thought were expert in their field. And I inherited some money, and I was a little bit careless with it. And I just kind of had a vibe that nothing would go wrong. Kind of a little bit of naivety. And unfortunately, I made some bad financial decisions. It kind of put me in a bad position for the rest of my life, unfortunately. Because of the medical conditions I have, it's hard for me to rebound and make it all up. So I would say, mainly, you know, I'm not a good person. I don't make any financial investment decisions that I really regret. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Wow. Hmm. That's a tough one. I can't think of anything off the top of my head. Okay. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Oh. Well. Okay. So I don't really have too much family left. The only one I have is my, it's just me and my uncle. And we communicate on a regular basis. He lives in Clearwater, Florida. So we're okay. But he's in his 80s, and obviously I'm in my 50s. So we have kind of small talk, and he's kind of concerned about my well-being. But it's kind of somewhat on a shallow level. We don't get really deep. And he's got his own problems. So we don't really get into too deep of a conversation. And other than him, it's really, there's not really anybody else I have. So I did, that probably makes me a little bit depressed, because I don't really feel I have anybody I can really count on or really confide in. Okay. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? It is challenging. I don't know why, but I do have a medical condition, so I think that might be part of the problem. And I have a little bit of BP. I have a little bit of a heart attack. I have a little bit of ADHD. So occasionally I'll get up and have to go to the restroom. And to answer your question, to make a long story short, it is challenging to get a good night's sleep. I usually wake up feeling a little bit tired or achy. But it is difficult. How have you been feeling lately? Well, I've been feeling okay. I mean, I've been kind of feeling mellow, actually. I'm trying to get some sleep. I'm trying to get some sleep. I'm trying to address issues that I haven't taken responsibility for. But I feel a bit of calmness as of late. That's good. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with the symptom? Well, I did say yes when I filled out the questionnaire. And I'm not positive if it was technically diagnosed with it. I did take a, I think it's called the MMPH, the Minnesota Multifaceted Personality. Something of whether, this is going back about six months ago. They were asking me questions about my memory, but then they also got into questions about my well-being psychologically too. And I think some of the answers said that they advised that I see a psychologist or a psychiatrist. I didn't follow up on that because of philosophical differences. But I think I might have, you know, a mild case of depression. Why? Well, you know, I'm not really a psychologist. Like I said, I'm just kind of going along in life. I'm doing okay, but life's passed me by, so I haven't really fulfilled my goals. I'm kind of alone. I'd like to have a girlfriend. I don't have a girlfriend, so that's somebody who I feel I can get close to. I'm kind of in a transitional period in my life right now, so there's a little bit of uncertainty. I have some kind of financial uncertainties. So, you know, overall, I'm not doing as good as I'd like to. Okay. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Wow. That's a good one. Really happy. Let me think about that a minute. Well, actually, it wasn't that long ago, actually. I went to, okay. I know that one, actually. I can come up with an answer. I helped out a lady at a trade show. It was Anaheim. It was a natural products expo, so it was pretty nice. We had some nice meals afterwards. There was a lot of exhibitors giving out really nice samples. It was in Anaheim, so I kind of got a chance to get away from L.A. And, you know, met some interesting people. They were very outgoing. They were willing to, like, have me experience their product or service. And I was around. I was around people that I worked with who I got to socialize with. So I think I was pretty happy back then. And that was about a month ago. That sounds like a great situation. Yeah. Yeah, it was. How would your best friend describe you? Best friend. I don't know if I really have a best friend. But I would say, hmm, I don't know. Technically, I really don't have a best friend, so it's really hard for me to answer that. So I can't really answer that. I can't really come up with an answer, to be honest. What would you say are some of your best qualities? I like to be conscientious. You know, I do have flaws in the area, but I think overall I'm conscientious. I try to be honest for the most part on the major issues. I might, you know, say what I like wise or, you know, I'm not perfect on that. But when it comes to the serious stuff, I tend to be pretty honest. I'm a hard worker. I've got good work ethic. I'm a hard worker. I tend to be pretty calm for the most part. Is there anything you regret? What do I regret? Well, can you elaborate on that? Whatever comes to mind. Well, I just, well, just overall, I regret not being a little more assertive in my earlier life. I kind of put myself in this position. It kind of goes back to my financial decisions. That was sort of, that's sort of like my albatross in my life. I made some bad decisions and unfortunately I have to kind of pay the price for now. So I'm kind of like, I'm sort of like living sort of a pauper existence right now, which is kind of, kind of depressing. So I would say that's probably what I regret most of all. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? Well, I would say change your life. I think it's important to really, you know, analyze, kind of go with what you really feel. I think I was going with other people's opinion, other people's advice. I was kind of going away from my basic beingness, you know, like the way I really felt. Like for example, I would make, I would do aggressive investing, which if it turned out good, it would have been like, sort of like winning the lot. I would have been well off for the rest of my life. But unfortunately it went the opposite way. Too many eggs in that basket. I really regretted going with my gut feeling and let other people influence me. And because by nature I'm a conservative person, so I should really do more conservative investments. In other areas of my life I tend to be more conservative, but I kind of made some aggressive financial decisions. So that's pretty much, kind of always goes back to that area as far as what I regret. Right. Yeah. Tell me how you spend your ideal weekend. Wow. That's interesting. I've been doing a lot of work on weekends, so. Well, I do like to be profitable. I like to do something where I can actually, you know, make money. That's sort of like my bread and butter time because I do trade shows. But if I'm not doing that, then I like to maybe watch some, you know, I like to go to entertainment, maybe go to a ball game, go to a movie, go with some friends. So I'll just, you know, just kind of kick back. But my main primary focus would be on, you know, earning money. Earning money on the weekends. What are you most proud of in your life? Huh. That's interesting. Most proud of. I would say that I lived, by and large, I lived a wholesome life, I would say. I never got myself into any kind of really bad, bad vice. You know, I. I. I lived a pretty wholesome life, I would say. That would probably. I don't know if I was really proud. But as far as I stayed the course, as far as not going down any real deep alley, so to speak. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Okay. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. My pleasure. Goodbye. Bye now. That was pretty interesting. It improved your technology, huh? It's a lot more like you're talking to a live person, isn't it? Oh, good. Because I think the last time I did it was kind of a little bit more like anime. You can tell it's like a more like a, like a video game. This looks more like a real person communicating. It's like. Did you do one with, with, with her before you did it? No, not her. I don't think I did it with her. But I did it with some other guys and I can't remember what it was, but it was a little bit more. I can't remember all the details, but this seemed more comfortable, more natural. I'm glad. I'm glad. Yeah. But you can take your headset off now. Okay. And I'll put it back on for you. Thank you. Yes, you can go back there and you're going to finish up with a quick survey about your experience. You're going to start with pressing this button and then you're going to keep going until you get it and it hits the next big button and then you're going to press this button to let us know you're done. So we hope you enjoyed this. We really, really wanted you to send us your feedback when you get back to us because you're taking care of your master . I'm going to just be in.