Okay. Just a pad if you don't mind. Like that? All right, yeah, come this way. Okay, perfect. I think that looks good. Okay. All right. I know it's a little- She look real though. Oh, good. All right. So now she's gonna chat with you for a little bit. I'm gonna give you the doorbell. I'm gonna put it right here. Oh, so just talk to her about anything? She'll start. Oh, okay. She'll ask you some questions. That's all I know. And then when she's done, she'll let you know, okay? Okay. And then you can just let her let me know. Thank you. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask you to do the same. I'm gonna ask you a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm fine today. Today's my daughter's birthday. Oh, that's great. Where are you from originally? California. Really? Yes. What are some things you really like about LA? The beach. I love the water. What are some things you don't really like about LA? The gang violence. Violence. Can you tell me about that? I lost a lot of friends growing up in, through elementary and high school, just losing them through gang violence. Okay. I'm sorry you're doing that. I'm sorry. Yeah, thank you. It's pretty tough out there. Yeah. I'm sure you can tell by my shoes, I'm not much of a world explorer. Do you travel a lot? Um, I haven't been to any place out of California yet. So, not really. Okay. What did you study at school? I'm gonna ask you a question. I'm an optician. I'm a certified optician. And I also have my associate's degree. That sounds interesting. How did you decide to do that? Actually, I went in, I didn't really know what I wanted to do when I first applied. I just knew I wanted to change my life and do something successful before I settled down and now have my daughter and everything. Um, actually, my guidance counselor kind of helped me. And I always thought, like, they were so cool because they're white, long lab coats. What's your dream job? To be an optometrist. Why? Um, because I'm already an optician and that's, like, the first step. And, um, why, it was a good question. It's because then I would have a, be able to have my own job and my own business. And I would have something successful to leave to my daughter. And she wouldn't have to really want for anything. It would be, like, a family business, but to help the community as well. And something I can leave for my daughter. Tell me about your kids. Um, my daughter, she's five years old. She'll be starting elementary school next week. And today is her birthday. Five years ago, I had her. Um, she is very smart. Um, I taught her home, I homeschooled her for five years. And, um, she's adorable. She's my heart. Do you find it easy to be a parent? No. This is, like, the hardest job ever. It's very hard. What's the hardest part about being a parent? Providing. Providing. Um, making sure that you wash your clothes. Um, because, I mean, it's hard enough to be a parent, but I'm a young parent. And I'm a little more mature than her father. So it's, um, it's the providing part, I would basically say. Making sure that you have everything that they need. It's so complicated. And let alone, um, it gives you enthusiasm to be more. To go the extra mile. Um, me even being here today, I probably would have still been in bed. But today's my daughter's party. And I was trying to make whatever extra little money I could make, you know, to make sure that she has a good day. So it's all about, um, going that extra mile. The only thing that you can do to provide for them. But it's a very hard job. Yeah. What's the best thing about being a parent? Um, that moment of the day when your child tells you how much they care about you. And, um, my daughter, her favorite thing to tell me is I'm her heart. You know, and how when they call your name, it's a sense of reality. Um, to be called mom or to be called dad. And it's, it's... It's just like, it infatuates you. It also lets you know, like, this is reality. This is my life. This is what I'm living right now. And it's a very good feeling. That's the best part of being a parent. That's so good to hear. Thank you. What are some ways that you're different as a parent than your parents? Um, a lot of different things. I'm actually taking care of my kids. I'm taking care of my daughter. Um, I'm here with her. Uh, I was raised by my grandparents. So, I mean, I didn't really, I didn't get to know my mom until I was 16. And my father, I mean, I couldn't point him out on the street, on the sidewalk. So, I don't know who he is. So, I feel that, um, I'm very different from them. Because no matter how hard the job is getting, I'm still here. And so, I don't give up. Yeah. Yeah. Has there been a positive influence in your life? Um, I would say, there's been, oh, excuse me. Um, there's been a lot of different people that have been very positive in my life. I can say, um, my sister, she was a good influence on me to get into the medical field. She's in, uh, she's an LVN. And, um, she's one of my older sisters. Um, I can say, me believing in God being in my life, God being in my life has also kept me strong. And to know that I don't have to take on this world by myself. Because God is there for me. And, um, hmm, I don't know. Um. I don't really look up to a lot of different people because people like. So, that's the most, like, I think that's been positive for me. Okay. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? I think I'm outgoing. I used to be shy, um, coming up as a kid. And I don't know. I don't know what happened to me. Uh, one day I just broke my leg. I broke out of my shell. And I've been, um, very accurate of showing my personality off. . Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? Um. I actually like. I like for the waves to collapse against the rocks at the beach. And I like to just sit there. And just zone everybody else out that's there. And rub my toes in the sand. And that is so relaxing. Hmm. How are you at controlling your temper? Oh. Excuse me. Sorry about that. Um. I learned that to. Cause it's a form of. It's a form of knowing who's in control. And is it your life or is it someone else's? And I feel that my temper, me controlling my temper. Is showing that I'm in charge of my life. So I don't even let stuff get to me. I don't even really remember what my temper is. the last time that I had to control my finger because that's how much I try to block out the negativity. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? Probably by husband, by daughter's father. Probably over like, oh you know the dishes or like the small things but not a physical altercation like with another human being. Okay. What's something you feel guilty about? Wow, being honest I kind of feel guilty about how things like basically how things ended before. Before my mom passed I wish that I could have helped her a little more even though people told me not to feel bad because she wasn't really there for me growing up but I kind of felt guilty like you know not being there as much as I could have been for her before she passed away so I think that's something that I still feel guilty for. Okay. Tell me about Nivelle or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Going through my mom passing away. How did you feel in that moment? Um, I felt like um basically that it was I felt kind of robbed in a sense like I felt everyone else had parents and I grew up with my grandparents and then for me to go so many years without actual you know mom and dad for me to get 18 years old and then then she left me and then I was like I'm gonna make my own life. I was like I'm gonna make my own life. It was kind of like um I don't know it was nerve-wracking because I felt robbed you know like I didn't have her all these years and then now that I'm older and I'm I don't even have her now so. Yeah, I'm sorry. Tell me about the hardest decisions you've ever had to make. Um, signing the paper of having a c-section when it was time for me to have my daughter. I was so nervous, so scared, um really didn't know what to do, how to take it, and I mean like that was so scary. What made you decide to do that? I was so scared. Almost the safest way of bringing my daughter into this world. Are you happy with that? Yes. That's good. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Hard. I didn't even sleep last night. That's why I'm yarning but um I kind of tend to try to do everything and I have to get I get back to that stage where I have to think about myself as well and give myself time. What are you like when you don't think well? A little like this, but actually I'm a little nicer today. Just groggy. Okay. How have you been feeling lately? Lately I've been feeling very confident about being positive about going the extra mile of being a good parent. Okay. That's great. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? Uh, yeah. I actually really don't care what other people think anymore. I used to let that bother me. I don't no more. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Uh, to be honest, I was so happy that I brought my daughter to this world today on her birthday. Uh huh. What would you say are some of your best qualities? Um, getting to know people. Is there anything you regret? Not at the moment. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? If I go, uh, to watch who I associate with. What are some things you wish you could change about yourself? My weight. Tell me about a time when someone made you feel really badly about yourself. Um, I would say my grandma. Can you tell me about that? Um, um, um. Um, just, I really will not. Okay. What are you most proud of in your life? Um, my daughter. It's my pride and joy. That's great. Okay. Okay, I think I've asked everything on YouTube. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Wow, thank you. Goodbye. Bye. This is cool. I need to take her home. You can take the headset off now. I'll stop the recording. Save this. No, you can take it off. Okay.