Okay. No, I was just wondering if she doesn't look like anything like the actual... Oh, like the person that's... Yeah, like a virtual reality thing. Yeah. Okay. All right. Okay. Okay. I'm going to give you this photo. Okay. Oh, when I'm done. Okay. Sure. So, how are you doing today? Pretty good. That's good. Where are you from originally? New York. Really? When did you move to L.A.? I moved to L.A. in the 70s. But I lived a lot of different places. How often do you go back to your hometown? I guess every few years, but I travel a lot. So, I've lived in Africa, I've lived in Spain, Switzerland, Hong Kong too. Wow. What do you enjoy about traveling? Different cultures, food, music, rituals, everything. The smells, the colors, it makes you feel alive. What did you do on your trip? Excuse me? I must have been on your trip. One of my trips? I lived in Kenya for about a year. I'd say I love horseback riding. So, when you're viewing other animals, when you're kind of disguised in the scent of a horse, you can approach the animals a lot closer. So, it was great seeing red-orange ball sunsets and riding along, you know, seeing so many animals. Yeah. What's one of your best memories of Kenya? In Kenya? Probably when I went to a Maasai village and I happened to, I used to live in Hawaii and I had been to Tahiti and I was wearing one of those paraos that are hand-painted and I had it tied over the left shoulder with a twisted knot and I happened to enter a Maasai village for the first time that day and I looked all around and the men were wearing their clothing exactly with the same twist. Yeah. On the same shoulder and they came over to me and they said, why are you dressed Maasai? And then they came back and gave me what appeared to be some very large, what looked like beaded leather bookmarks, but they were actually earrings and they would have like weighed my ears straight down. And then they gave me some bracelets and then they had me wear something. And then they had me wear something around my waist and they said, now you look proper Maasai. So, but I, you know, I just, I have a lot of, I think living, getting a chance to live in different countries around the world, I just, you feel alive. All your senses are completely, you know, awoken. Yeah. That's great. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? I think it's not so clear cut. I think a lot of peoples are a hybrid of both. I mean, I think I can be extremely shy sometimes, but extremely brazen and very courageous at other times. Probably one of my best virtues is I'm a very gutsy person. So when I really feel passionate about something, I risk everything to go achieve it sometimes. I believe that. Usually. Well, I make decisions very quickly and I find that I have a friend who makes decisions very slowly and he said to me, tell me how I can make decisions quicker. And I told him, I said, well, in each case you always have no choice. And he says, what do you mean? There's hundreds of choices. And I said, not really because it's gut wise. There's only one and it doesn't really matter. You waste time, physical energy, emotional energy, mental energy, reflecting all of that. When gut wise, you always know what choice you really want to do is. And it doesn't matter whether there's a 98% chance of failure. Even if there's a 2% chance of success, you have to go to the one that may yield you joy. So I always go to that. It's to me a waste of total time and energy to even think about another choice because who cares if you remain unscathed, but it yields no joy. Yeah. I see what you mean. Yeah. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the FistPix screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? Pardon? You said you put your fist... When you're annoyed. What do I do when I'm annoyed? Um... I think when I'm annoyed sometimes I... It's because sometimes I can have... I need to be... I need to be a little more patient. I guess you really have to put yourself in somebody else's shoes rather than the way you would react. You have to have more empathy. How hard is that? Not really. I think that's the reason why I enjoy traveling so much because you're put in other situations where you're forced to... To... To... Understand... To understand other people's lives a lot more regardless of how different they are from yours. Different situations. I've been to so many third world countries and lived in so many different situations that it helps create that, which is why travel is really the best education there is. Yeah. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? Let me think. Um... Um... Last time I argued about something... Um... God, I'm trying to remember. Um... Um..., I think it was when somebody didn't respect actually my privacy in something. Can you tell me about that? Um... Oh, I know what it was. Um... It was somebody who... Belonged to the, uh... Uh... Scientology faith. Um... I, uh... Inherited... I inherited, um... Possibly, uh... A immune disorder from my mother. My mother died from lupus. And, um... Uh... I sometimes, even right now, I have, like, skin rashes, welts, and everything. And I am very photosensitive. And, um... I have... I had an, you know, an episode where I was... I had big flare-up, and I wasn't really feeling well. I felt flushed and everything. And the Scientologist tells me that I needed to be audited. And, um... And he said something about, are you aware of past lives? And I had told him that I was Buddhist. And I was kind of curious that if you're going to try to recruit somebody to convert to your religion, at least you should find out the other person, what religion they are. Just to even be informed, to be able to talk to them. And he said that, are you aware that, um... About something in your past? And I go, yes, I believe that many religions, including Buddhism and Scientology, believe that things that you have had in your history sometimes affect you. Or things that you keep, anger issues, bitterness, resulting from even your past relationships or your parents. And such can affect and make you even sick, make you even have cancer. Yes, we believe that. And we also believe, I said, that, you know, that you have the power of each person has a godlike or a Buddha-like nature to go ahead and you can make yourself, even when I'm on the verge of possibly being... I probably get one cold maybe every 15 years. I don't have a tendency to be sick at all. And a large part of it is, I think, when I think I'm on the verge, I take... Sort of like, and I did this even when I was a child. When I was seven, I would fall down, I have my boo-boo, and I would say, I would have the good part, you know, help the bad part, in a simplistic way in terms of a child. And I would actually, even when I was in a very severe car accident where I got cut by glass, my whole back, I concentrated healing. And when I went back to the hospital, the doctors actually had the nurses come and say, this is incredible that her last week her back was so severely cut. This is an incredible healing thing. So I believe that. But I was just, I think, annoyed and irritated only because the Scientologist told me that because he had taken 20 or 40 courses and he had these certificates on his wall, that he felt that he was more enlightened. And it wasn't even a matter, I said, of whether he was... whether he took 20 or 40 courses or whether I'd been practicing Buddhism, whether it was for 5, 10, 15, 20 years, or whether somebody had been practicing some type of Christianity for 50 years and been sitting in a church pew every day. It doesn't mean a person could have never attended church and be more spiritual than somebody who has, you know. So I just was thinking that was the antithesis of somebody who says they were enlightened. But it's just the way, I guess, he kept cramming. You know, his faith down my throat that after a while I was pretty patient with it. But then it was so pompous that I became irritated. Especially when he kept telling me that I was audited and yet this same person needed a hip surgery the following week. And I didn't point it out to him because I just didn't even want to get into it. But one could say, hey, you have a bad hip because you need to be audited. That something that you did in your past. Otherwise... You wouldn't need to get hip surgery. I mean, I believe to some extent things that can be caused by people themselves. And then he's flippantly said, well, you're aware. Us Scientologists believe that past lives can also affect. You know, and I'm thinking to myself, Buddhists of all religions are kind of like well known for, you know, believing in, you know, cause and effect and past life situations. And I thought he should really read up. If he's trying to convert other people from other religions. So, but, you know, I, you know, I just didn't, you know, care for the fact that he wouldn't drop it. But other than that, I mean, I don't... You might see him in a different way. Sometimes to have a little more tact, I guess. When, when, in terms of patients. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. I can think of that right away. I guess disconnecting my father when he was like a vegetable in the hospital. Yeah. I'm sorry. How did you decide to do that? My brother was supposed to be the strong one supposedly because he is in the medical field. So my sister and I said, well, you know, he's the medical one. So he's probably used to seeing this all the time. But it turns out he was the weakest one. And even after, you know, my father kept, you know, I don't know, I don't know. You know, bucking these body would actually be fighting the artificial respirator and all kinds of things. You see all this jerking of body movements and stuff. It was just very hard. But, you know, it was after a while the, you know, even the physicians and even the pastor from that particular, you know, hospital. They said that he was no longer like even if he was to awaken from that, he, his brain function wouldn't. It would have been, you know, negligible. Yeah, it was. Mm hmm. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Hmm. Hmm. I don't think I really have that many things that are that traumatic. That happened to me that I've had to block them. I really don't know what it is within my makeup, which doesn't make me feel like I need to. I don't keep, I have friends that have unmitigated issues, which they're not even aware of that affect their behavior or maybe their bitterness or their anger or their hatred or their fear. And for some reason, I feel blessed that I don't really, I can't really even think of something that, I mean, I've had some bad situations happen to me, but it's not that for some reason they've traumatized me and affecting, you know, my behavior where I would, where I block it, that I'm not aware of something or I hold residual negativity for some reason. So I really can't think of anything. I mean, there's bad things that happen and I know that they are, but it's not like I feel like it's necessary for me to block them because I've been able to, you know, sometimes they were unfortunate things that happened. Okay. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Pretty easy. I can usually make myself sleep in any situation. If I have a one-hour flight to San Francisco, I could just kind of... Lean against the window with a pillow, have the blanket over and even an hour flight pass out before the plane is even taken off from the ground. So I can, I have literally when I've had little sleep and I very high energy, so I don't really need that much sleep, but say like if I'm in Africa in a bumpy potholed unpaved road and I suddenly decide I need a few moments of sleep, I'll just prop something up, put my... Elbow against the window and say, I think I'm going to take a nap for 15 minutes, go like this and through the jostling, I could just take a nap for 15 minutes. So I don't really have that problem. That's good. How have you been feeling lately? Okay. Pretty okay. I mean, I could deal without the skin flare-ups, but, you know, from the photosensitivity and all that, but other than that, I'm in pretty good spirits. Have you ever studied anything in a behavior or something? Have I ever? I studied what? Have you ever studied any of your behavior or thought-stating? I still couldn't hear you. I'm sorry. Have you ever studied any of your behavior or thought-stating? Have I ever studied changes in my behavior? What was the word? Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Uh-uh. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Um, I don't know, just with friends and everything, just even this past week, just seeing friends that I enjoy being with and just having a great meal, laughing, just, you know, having a good time, listening to music. Is there anything you regret? Regret about my entire life, you mean? Or are you talking about just recently, or what are you talking about? Whatever comes to your mind. Hmm. You know, it's funny. I find that a lot of the negative experiences in my life that have happened have also been opened up experiences that are also great, that I have not overlooked. For example, I got totally ripped off by my business partner to the tune of my whole savings that I've had to start all over again. And sometimes people say to me, like, are you sure you're okay? Are you just pretending to be okay? Are you angry? Do you want to seek revenge? If I was, you know, because my business partner essentially ripped me off. We knew each other's families, which was even more difficult in a way. And he stole essentially my whole life savings, essentially, in a way. And he got sent to prison. The FBI was involved. Interpol was involved. I was living in Switzerland, and my father was sick, and I was going back and forth. And, but, you know, if I hadn't gotten involved with him in business, I wouldn't have had a lot of rich experiences. And I think sometimes the reason why, I don't know why I'm such a positive person, but for some reason I'm able to. It's not that I'm purposely trying to. I do see the positiveness in even horrible situations. I wouldn't have gotten. To live in Barcelona and Zurich. I wouldn't have learned to speak as good Spanish, German. Lived in Europe if I had not gotten involved in business with my business partner who ended up ripping me off. But, and there's a lot of other experiences and different friendships that I developed during that period of time. And in a way, it was a totally different life. A different world that would, you know, that I would have never. Had the. Chance, you know, to live through if I had not been involved in my, you know, but of course it cost me financially. And, but then again, I've always been a type of person who, you know, money isn't everything. And I think the one I least cared about money is when I made the most of it. So, there you go. And, for example, one of my favorite times in my life, probably when I lived in Kenya. And you would think that, you know, a lot of people have this. Really bad vision that I may be looking, living in mud dung huts or something and living very primitively. I mean, it's not like that at all. And you'd think that with the least amount of technological innovations and stuff like that. I mean, actually, and I really didn't have, you know, that much many material goods at the time. I mean, I had the blast. I had probably one of the best years of my life when I was living in Kenya. Hmm. That's so good to hear. What advice would you give yourself 10 or 20 years ago? The same thing that I did probably when I was about 15 or 16. To live your life with passion. And again, like choose the way I was saying earlier about making decisions. You have to make those decisions gut wise. What will give you a sense of awe and wonderment. What will make you, give you joy. And you have to, it's regardless of what the percentages are. Even if you only have a 1% chance of success, you have to go towards that. Because that's the only thing that will yield, you know, the happiness in your life. Hmm. What do you most have in your life? The fact that I've adhered to that and been brazen, whatever you want to say. Have the balls, the chutzpah, the kohonis to go ahead and follow my passions. And, you know, I guess people call them sometimes. Strong decisions usually. Decisions that are, where you remain unscathed usually don't yield joy. That's just Murphy's Law. That's just the way it is. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Sure. Goodbye. Bye. Hi. mainly neutralized space you all I know