Okay. Yes. I'm doing okay. I'm from Greenwich, Connecticut. Yes. I moved here in 2008, so about five years ago. I try to go back at least once a year. Sometimes I go more, sometimes less. How does it compare to L.A.? Why? I understand. Why did you move to L.A.? I moved out here for college after I graduated high school, and my mom and sister live in California. How easy was it for you to get used to living in L.A.? Initially, it was easy because I felt like it was a new experience, so you kind of adapt and just are experiencing everything at once. But then after the first few years, when it really sets in how different it is and what life is out here, it became more difficult than originally. What did you study at school? That sounds interesting. How did you decide to do that? Are you still working in art? Yes, I have a fine arts degree that I got last year. I'm a student at the University of California, and I'm an art major in the Department of Art and Design. I'm a student at the University of California, and I want to do art as a career. I want to be a photographer. Awesome. Are you happy to do that? Yeah, I really enjoy working or interning in forensics. I like that better than initially. What I wanted to do was freelance photography. I feel like it's a more secure job, and it's very interesting. How does it feel to work at a law firm? It's really interesting, and I'm really happy to do it. What's one of your most memorable experiences? That's an interesting question. I guess just my childhood in general, growing up. Can you tell me about that? Well, my family is very close, my extended family as well, and they all, most of them, live in California. They all live within the area or on the East Coast in general, so we would always do large family parties and things for holidays and religious purposes and things like that. That sounds like a great situation. Yeah, it is really fun, and we try and all get together as much as possible, which is more difficult now since everyone is spread out amongst different states and countries. Yeah. I'm glad to hear that. It's a really great thing. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? I consider myself more shy. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? I watch reality television. I think it's kind of funny and lighthearted. There's a lot to watch. Like what? I watch like Bravo TV, like the Real Housewives shows and just like funny things that you don't really need to pay attention to. Okay. How are you at controlling your temper? I'm good I guess. I don't really have like a temper. If I'm having, if I'm more stressed out it definitely shows in my attitude but I don't really have like anger. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? Well me and my boyfriend like bicker all the time just like about like insignificant things but other than that I had an argument with my dad a few days ago. Can you tell me about that? Um there's been like a couple of times. There's been like some tension going on since I went and visited over the holidays this past winter. Things about his girlfriend and he thinks that I should be the one to make some kind of effort to have a relationship with her although he doesn't for whatever reason think that it should go both ways. So for like the 30th time he, we were on the phone and he was telling me how I need to call her and speak to her. And I had told him that I was going to do it over this past weekend because of the Jewish holidays and he kind of was just like very immature and telling me oh forget it she doesn't want to hear from you now. And kind of just like I could care less because I, I don't care about having a relationship with her so she doesn't want to hear from me you know. It's easier for me. Yeah. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. Um. I mean every time, I mean it's been the same recurring argument a lot and I wish that I could, sometimes I do but I wish that the times that it turns into an explosive fight that I could just bite my tongue. But the thing is that he says certain things that are untrue or things he knows that like will tick me off that are really nasty and that he shouldn't be saying to me. So he, so I kind of just like lose it and I can't really. Like not say anything. Yeah. I'm sorry. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Um. Well I guess the hardest decision I made which I, it didn't, I only realized that it's the hardest decision like looking back is once you decide where to, I don't know, where to go. After you graduate high school, where to go to college because for me I basically changed my entire life and moved away and did all that on my own. So it didn't seem like that hard of a decision at the time. It felt like just like a progression of the next step. But looking back now, that's probably one of the hardest decisions I made. Okay. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Um. Well I wish I could erase the event or seeing my grandmother's funeral which obviously it wouldn't change anything but it wasn't, seeing her there was not something I'd want to. Yeah. Like have in my memory. Yeah. Has someone else been a positive influence in your life? Um. She was. She was a very positive influence and always was not judgmental. Um. And now I mean my parents are great role models just in general. I mean they're very successful people. So whether or not we have like disagreements or that we're separate people. They kind of are good role models in terms of what you want to have when you are older. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Um. Usually it's easy. The problem is staying asleep. No matter how late I go to bed whether it's 10 p.m. or 4 a.m. I will be up like clockwork by 7.30 or 8 o'clock in the morning the latest every single day. And I can't seem to figure out why I cannot stay asleep longer. Are you triggered by something? No. I just in the morning I guess I'm a lighter sleeper but I just wake up like I just cannot stay asleep anymore. Which never used to be a problem this consistent. But now it's I cannot remember the last time I slept past 8.30 in the morning. What are you like when you don't sleep well? I mean it just makes it hard. If I have to do stuff during the day it makes it a lot more tiring. But it doesn't really. I'm so used to it now it doesn't really change my mood. It's just part of every day. Okay. How have you been feeling lately? Um. I don't know I kind of just feel very. Um. Like so so. Just. No extreme highs. No extreme lows. It's kind of. One note. Blank. And. Have you ever studied anything that has been easier or exhausting for you? I mean nothing like lately. Um. Like recently. It's just I would say over a period of years I've kind of progressively become more. Seclusive and. Just reserved and. Not very outgoing. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. I have been diagnosed with anxiety. What got you into the health? Um. I had some breathing problems for a day or two and I had to go to the hospital. Um. Because I thought it was more serious because I couldn't breathe. But. They said that it was a physical manifestation of my anxiety. Do you feel like therapy is useful? I think in the right setting and with the person who's doing it if they're open minded and the therapist is helpful and good at what they're doing then yeah. Do you still go to therapy now? No. I haven't been to therapy since I was a kid. Okay. Why did you stop? Um. I went because my parents thought it would be a good idea to like deal with whatever issues they were having with me. But it was never so. I mean we just sat around and talked about my day. It wasn't. I didn't feel like I needed therapy at the time so I didn't really get much out of it. I see what you mean. Tell me about the last time you felt really happy. Well. I was happy when I was back home at my boyfriend's house with his family over the New Year's holiday. When I'm there I can always just. We save up our money so it's a complete vacation. I don't have to worry about paying bills. I don't have to worry about what I have to do tomorrow. Who I have to deal with. I just. Every morning we wake up we hang out. Just enjoy the day. That's great. Is there anything you're interested in? In general? I regret the college I chose to go to. I didn't. Being from the East Coast the whole collegiate system is set up a lot differently and the universities out there are not the same as like the tight knit California school system out here. So when I was researching colleges I kind of thought that Santa Monica College was just a general college. Just like Boston College back home or you know any other school with the name college at the end of it. I didn't realize until you know the end of my first year even that it was more like a transfer school. Like you can't. I didn't even realize you couldn't get a bachelor's degree from there when I went. So it kind of created more problems for me. What advice would you give yourself 10 years ago? Well considering I'm 22 I'd probably say 10 years ago I would give myself the advice to probably stay closer to home and to have really pursued other options rather than just be completely invested in moving to California. How would your best friend describe you? Um. My best friend would describe me as a great charismatic funny outgoing socially enjoyable person which is different than how people who aren't my good friends would describe me. Which I mean I don't I mean it is what it is. I am very outgoing and have a great time when I'm with my friends in my element but around strangers and in like uncomfortable groups and things I just I am very outgoing. I'm very shy and don't really speak much. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Um. Recently my friend was visiting and we went to a Clippers basketball game a few weeks ago and I really enjoyed that. Nice. Yeah. What would you say are some of the things that you would like to do in the future? Um. I'm very caring. I am a very good judge of character which I mean I guess I mean I consider it to be a quality for myself. Um. I'm very I mean I'm not very affectionate I'm more I mean I guess I guess so. Okay. So I guess I'll just say that I'm a very good judge of character. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Goodbye. Thanks. Okay. I think we can cut that off and stop the recording. I'm going to go to the other computer and we'll finish up with a close survey about your experience. And I hope that I can chat with you a little bit more and then we can see if there's any more about Ellie and her experience.