Super neat, I like this. Yeah, it's a really unique experience. Most people haven't done it before. Me either at all. Can you do it at home? Eventually, hopefully, yes. Wow. So you're gonna see her for a second, then I'm gonna shrink her back down while I continue setting up some things. So there she is. Now we're gonna wait for some other things to pop up here. Okay. Okay. Okay. Now I'm gonna start her up. She says goodbye, Chris. Alrighty. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I'm just created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to ask any questions you have. I'm not afraid to tell you anything. Your answers are completely confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes, I am. Okay. So how are you feeling today? I'm feeling fine. Thanks for asking. Awesome. Where are you from originally? I'm originally from California, born and raised. And I live in Carson at the moment. Nice.о What's the things you really liked about LA? Tracye Kelley . I love the beaches. Your question? Yes, sure. Heres some advice. Go ahead. See you soon. I really love Looking North. Okay. I think I heard you say similar. And see where does the cyan point here. Um, nah, not really. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? I read and I listen to soft music like jazz or something. What are some things that make you do or not? I don't like people to walk in front of me, don't say excuse me, cut me off in traffic when I'm driving. I don't like a tailgater. Little small comments, like small remarks that people may make that may upset me. I just don't like to be, I'm easily aggravated, so I don't like to be aggravated. What's your favorite thing about being a driver? What's your favorite thing about being a driver? What do you do when you're annoyed? How are you controlling your temper? I'm pretty good at controlling it sometimes, but at times I can get very irate, so I'm working on that right now. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? Oh, I haven't argued in almost a year, but when I did, it was over a girl. It was my ex-boyfriend. It was over a female, but it's over now, so I haven't had any real arguments since almost a year. Okay. What did you study at school? I studied, in college I did child development, and I also studied computer science. What do you do now? Right now, I'm a homemaker. I don't work at all. I haven't been working in about three months now. I was laid off, but I was doing receptionist work, so I'm currently looking for employment at this moment. That's great. What's your dream job? My dream job is to own my own design graphics computer shop, which means when you do your graphic, your designs online, and you send them to different distributors, and what they do is they approve or extend them. They approve or disapprove what they like or dislike about my designs, and if they want to go ahead with it, they'll buy them from me, and then they'll go from there. Really? Do you travel a lot? No. I used to in the past, but not at the moment. What's one of your most memorable experiences? When I went to Hawaii with my daughter and my mom, it was very delightful. We stayed for almost two weeks, and it was not even two years ago. It was very, very memorable. It was a great time. It was very, very nice, and I wish I could go back. The beaches were beautiful. The food was great. The luau's are great at night. It was really, really nice. A great experience. What's your most talked about experience? That's great. How close are you to your family? Very close. My mother and my daughter, we're all three. We're like sisters. We couldn't be any closer. What's something that has been a positive influence on your life? My parents, my grandparents who have now gone, they're past, but they were a very positive influence in my life. My guy friend that I'm dating now, he's very positive in my life. So I have a lot of backbone support, you can say. Do you like your living situation? I don't right now because I'm living with my mother and stepdad. I'm trying to move someplace on my own now, but it's kind of hard not working at all. So I just have to wing it out until I can do better. Okay. Do you have roommates? No, it's just myself, my daughter, my mom, and my stepdad at the moment. Okay. Have you ever served in the military? No, I haven't. Okay. Okay. Have you ever been back? Yes, I have. How long ago were you back? Almost two years now. Did you think you had a problem before you found out? No, I had no idea. What got you to speak up? Just always feeling down and out, clinging myself in, not wanting to be bothered with the outside world. Just little mood swings and just can't sleep at night. All kind of little stuff that kind of got me feeling like something wasn't right about me. Okay. Do you still go to therapy now? Yes, I do. Okay. Do you feel like therapy is useful? Yes, I do. It's very useful. Okay. Do you have any other questions? No. Is going to a therapist helping you? It is. Very much so. Tell me more about that. The reason why I feel like it's helping me is because the lady who I see there at the therapy place, she's very nice. She's willing to help out in any way she can. She's almost to me like a psychiatrist. She's very good. I mean she talks to me about things, encourages me what not to do, what to do to help calm down, to feel better. and she's just very nice all in all. I always leave there confident all the time. What sort of changes have you noticed since you've been going to therapy? Number one, my mood swings. I've noticed a big change in that and my attitude. Okay. How has staying there affected you? It affected me in a great way. I would never say negative because, like I said, it goes back to the helpfulness that I've received from the lady and from the therapist and the different ways I was coached on how to improve my lifestyle to avoid the problem that I do have right now I suffer with. So that's how it affected me that way. Okay. What were your symptoms? The attitudes, the mood swings, couldn't sleep at night, depressed all the time. No outside company at all. Didn't want to be bothered with anybody, friends or family, locked up in my room all the time. Halfway not wanting to eat or overeating. It was just a lot. Are you triggered by something? Maybe like any little thing would trigger me off. Like somebody could say something wrong to me that I would think was wrong and would just trigger it. I would just get triggered and just snap for no reason. It's just, I don't know what cost it besides that. That's great. How do you cope with that? Well, now I'm coping with it by not snapping as much and just trying to stay calm. I just need a lot of positive environment around me, not negativity. That helps too. So with that being said, I just kind of maintain and keep my high self-esteem. I just keep my high self-esteem. I just keep my high self-esteem. I just keep my high self-esteem. I just keep my high self-esteem. I'm not trying to come up as much as I can. Nice. How have you been feeling lately? A lot better than before. That's good. Have you ever studied change in your behavior or thoughts lately? Yes, I have. Very positive thoughts. Very positive behavior. Much better than what it was. Very big improvement from before. Do you feel that way often? Yes, I have been for the past few months. I've been feeling a little better. Do you feel down? I have at times, but today, no. I'm feeling pretty upbeat. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? It's not very easy, but I try. But for the past few nights, I have been sleeping the full night. So, that's a positive for me. What do you like when you know sleep well? Very cranky, very groggy, moody. Okay. When was the last time you felt really happy? Actually, yesterday. I received some good news over the phone. And I was happy the whole day. I'm still kind of happy about it today, too. So, that was very good for me. That's good. How would your best friend describe you? My best friend is a male. He would probably describe me as upbeat, always ready to go, love to eat, just a fun person to be around. Is there anything you regret? No, I don't regret anything. But everything that's happened versus the past and the future is a bit closed-off. I would heartbreaking, though. Thank you for moving on. Bye. Goodbye. Goodbye. Bye-bye. Goodbye. That was awesome. Was it? I love it.