Hello She seems nice Now I'm going to let everything keep launching here I'm only 5'10 Okay When she says goodbye Okay, great Thanks for coming in today Thanks for coming in today Okay Okay Yes I'm alright I'm alright Little tired Awesome. Where are you from originally? I grew up just outside of Philadelphia and I moved to Los Angeles almost five years ago. Nice. What are some things you really like about LA? Weather, for sure. Also, I was a film major and business minor in school, so I came out to be involved in entertainment. What are some things you don't really like about LA? Traffic, smog, some of the people are a little flaky, but I generally like LA. What's your favorite place to go to? I can't even think of one. Do you consider yourself an extrovert? No, quite the opposite. I consider myself an extrovert. Sometimes when I'm doing pen, I turn on the fish tank screen saver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? I enjoy reading. Okay. You know, a glass of wine, perhaps. Throw on an old movie. Try to get out of the apartment and maybe take a walk, something like that. What are some things that make you feel relaxed? Cruelty. People not using their, people being careless or thoughtless, you know, not really giving consideration to other people when they do things. Yeah. I'm not a person who's really good at talking. What do you do when you're annoyed? Usually vocalize my annoyance, like unless I figure it would be really inappropriate in the moment, but I'll usually let somebody know as gently as possible that I'm kind of annoyed with what's going on. How are you at controlling your temper? Usually pretty good, but I also, you know, there's like a limit point where I go past and it's like, then I cannot control it really anymore. So I have a long fuse, but kind of a large amount of dynamite there sometimes. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone? And what was it about? I had an argument with my girlfriend recently, and it was, you know, we have very different communication styles, so I guess I was not feeling heard and she was not feeling like my response was appropriate at the time, maybe. Okay. What did you study at school? I was a film and media arts major and business minor and I actually got my masters of business administration at right now I'm looking for work preferably something entertainment related but I will take anything that will help pay the bills and let me continue living on the west side what I really wanted to do was to produce films so that was sort of my concentration in the film major and I did a couple of internships for production companies as an undergrad and in in my master's program and you know I like working with creative people and developing stories and developing projects and being the person that can go from the business and legal people to the creative people and try to make everyone happy and make some money I try to I mean I'm a little low on funds right now but I really enjoy traveling I drove cross-country when I moved from Philadelphia to LA so I drove down the east coast to Savannah and then all through the south and the southwest I've been to England four times I've been to continental Europe twice a lot of the islands Montreal it's the only place I've been to in Canada but there's a lot more of the US and also Asia Africa Australia those places I've not been to yet but I'd love to go hmm I would say maybe the first time I ever left the country first time ever went to Europe we got to take the train the Glacier express through the Alps and Switzerland and it was unbelievable with the snow and things like that I took a lot of pictures and I don't know it's one of the most beautiful things I've ever seen so it really sticks out in my mind I'm very close with my parents I talk with my mom on the phone probably two or or three times a week. I just talked to my father for Father's Day the other day. And, you know, he always, he sends me emails of news things that he found interesting or stuff that's related to film and things like that. I'm close with my sister. I have a niece and a nephew. I'm very close with them. I talk to my sister a decent amount. And I always see them when I'm home for the holidays. But they're all in the Philadelphia area. So I'm not physically around them only maybe once a year, twice at the most if there's a wedding or something like that. Have you still had a positive influence in your life? Oh, there have been a lot. Definitely my parents. Some of my teachers in high school that sort of encouraged me. Like my social studies, like world cultures, particularly. And I think that's something that I've been very, very, very, very, very, very proud of. I had a professor, one of my English teachers. My film program, I did a summer internship program twice. And they had one of the professors from my film 101 class was the moderator for that. So I kept in touch with him as well. How do you like your living situation? I like it a lot better now. My last roommate was only, he was somebody from the MBA program. He was a professor at the University of California. And he was a year behind me. And he was just a terrible roommate. He just moved out. So I was replaced by somebody else who was young and nice. And he has the money for rent. And he has a rabbit. And he's just like, he's a pretty cool guy. So got a decent sized place. I've got the bigger bedroom of the two. And the rent is not too bad. And I get to live like in the Culver City Mar Vista side of town, which I really enjoy. So I like where I live. And the rent is not bad for the neighborhood. Not at all. But I'm a little broke right now. So got to get back working again and calm down the money situation. But the living situation itself is fine. Okay. Do you have roommates? I have one roommate. Yes. Nice guy. Okay. Have you ever served in the military? No, I have not. Okay. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Okay. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Yes. How long ago were you diagnosed? Well, I mean, I guess in college, I was seeing a cognitive therapist for a while. But I was never on medication or anything like that. And I kind of got away from it. But last summer, about a year ago, kind of came back and I was seeing the individual counselor at school. I was doing group counseling sessions, and they had me on Welbutrin also. So I guess a year. Did you have a problem before you found out? Yes. What got you into this job? I had a DUI, which all of my drinking, I think, was really predicated more upon the depression and not being able to handle that properly. So that was part of it. And then the stress of school, having problems there, having problems in my relationship. And, you know, it was really a hard time. low point and I felt terrible so I decided I should probably do whatever I could do in order to get better. Okay. Do you still go to therapy now? No, I took a leave of absence from school so that's not really available to me but I still go to like a sobriety support group and you know, going back to school is a possibility so I might go back to doing the counseling sessions there but my health insurance runs out in like two months so I don't really have, I won't really have a way to see someone unless I see someone from like the Department of Health or something like that so we'll see. Okay. Do you feel like there's people? I do. I definitely think that. Okay. There are people that are probably on medication that are not in therapy that probably should be. I'd rather do therapy without medication than medication without therapy that is for sure. So I definitely think it's a positive to speak with somebody on a regular basis who is sort of removed from your life and objective about it and you know, just listen. That's really the most important part is having somebody to listen. Okay. Is going to a therapy helping you? Yeah, I would definitely say it was. Can you tell me about that? Yeah, I mean just having dedicated time of like an hour or so, you know, 50 minutes, whatever to, where somebody gets to listen to what's going on with you and offer some possible guidance or something like that. I think that guidance in that direction, you know, in the direction you want to go I think is always positive. And it forces you to be like more mindful of what's actually bothering yourself when you have to vocalize it and when you have to look them in the eye and tell them what you're feeling and try to help figure out why and what you can do about it. I think that's always a good thing. What sort of changes have you noticed in your life? My mood has been a lot better. Yeah. You know, it was a really down black time that last depressive period. So just thinking a lot more about like the future and what I'm doing and the way I'm thinking about things. And as opposed to just like stumbling through and existing, I'm like trying to think more about what I really want and what I believe and the things that are healthy for me and all the stuff that it should be, should have been doing before but wasn't. Okay. How has the pandemic affected you? I'm just generally improved the mood. What were your symptoms? I wasn't drinking often but when I was, I was drinking to get drunk. I was very down. There was some weight gain. I was sleeping a lot. You know, I just wasn't enjoying the things I used to enjoy. As a result, I was feeling a lot better. I didn't drink as much. You know, I was worried about money. I was worried about where, what direction my life was headed, which I still am to an extent but it's not like bringing me down so much now. You know, I was just caught up in a down period, like a rut that I couldn't get out of. Are you good at racing today? I think it was probably just not feeling successful in the things that I wanted to do and kind of just got swept up in the day to day of racing. I think I was like, oh, well I need to be in school because I don't have a job and I don't have any money and I'm trying to figure it out and I'll do this internship and that's not going to really lead to anything. It was just a very, you know, I wasn't moving anywhere, I wasn't, I was stuck in one spot and I didn't like that. That's good. How do you help with that? Well, I'm not drinking. Not like that anyway. How do you handle that? I try to be a little bit more mindful of what I'm doing and why I'm doing it. If I end up back in school again, I'm going to definitely take up the counseling again and the group sessions again. I don't know if I want to be back on medication. I felt like that was good for the time frame that it was in, but I don't want to have to take something every day in order to feel good. I'm trying to get back in shape now. I joined the local gym, and I figure that's going to help me too. But the main thing is going to be figuring out what to do with my life because I'm 30 now, so I feel like it's time to get the real career started. I've been okay. Just really worried about the money situation because I don't have the student loans to fall back on anymore and stuff, so I'm pretty broke, hence doing a virtual reality study. But when I get that sorted out and I'm on a regular schedule again, and I'm doing something where I'm secure financially here, then I'm sure I will feel a lot better, and I will be excited again. How do you understand the changes that are going to be here in the future? I'm probably more positive now, I would say, in general. I'm still – the temper situation, like I'm still – the same things that bothered me in the past still bother me, but they're not permanently, like, getting me down. You know, there's just – I would be upset about something in the moment and need to express that and then figure out a solution or let it go as opposed to staying in that funk. So I feel more resilient, definitely. Do you get upset about things? Yeah, most of the time. Tell me more about that. Well, like I said, I do get upset about things. I'm not somebody who likes to keep things inside, but even getting them out in the past wouldn't really get me through them. You know, it would be something I'd really have to slog through, and it would take me – you know, it would pull me down for sure. But now I feel a little bit more comfortable with feeling what I'm feeling and getting it out and then trying to work through it. Do you feel down? Some days I do, you know, but it's not every day, and it's not like for no particular reason anymore. I mean, I might be down because I'm stressed out because I have a problem that, you know, I need to address in life, like my lack of funds right now and, you know, trying to get in back shape and, you know, trying to figure out what to do with my education that I have so far and find what I want to do. Like, that's something that people should be worried about, but I don't feel like it's any anxiety or anything like that is, you know, or sadness or fear is dominating anymore. It's usually okay. I've been going to bed later and waking up later since I've not had a job, so that is something I need to watch out for because I really need to start waking up earlier in order to apply for things and go, you know, meet people in person and try to figure something out on the job side of things, but I'm sleeping okay. I'm not being sleepless or anything like that. There are definitely some days where I feel like staying in bed sometimes, but physically I feel okay. What are you like when you don't sleep well? That sucks. I mean, I definitely, I almost feel like I have, like, cold sweats. If I only get four or five hours of sleep or something like that, I will, you know, I'll have a runny nose. I'll feel a little feverish. I'll be hungry at weird times. Like, I'll just be very run down, and I don't like that feeling at all. I try to get, like, seven or eight hours of sleep every night. Okay. When was the last time you felt really happy? Um... Probably when I was home. Over the holidays. Yeah, when I was home over the holidays, I got to spend, like, a week and a half with my parents and my niece and nephew and my sister, and I got to see some of my old friends. I got to see some of my extended family. And, you know, it's just a generally good feeling. And it was also my mom's birthday on the 27th of December, so that was a fun occasion as well. How were your best friends? I would say very intelligent, very funny, a little intense, a little bit crazy, but, you know, very loyal also. Generally a good person, a nice person. Is there anything you regret? I regret a lot of things in my life. I've done some things, like the DUI. I definitely regret that, you know. I dropped out of the first college that I went to because things were really going badly for me at that time. I mean, I kind of regret that. I think it might have been the right thing to do, but, you know, it would have been nice to be able to finish school, you know, on time. And start a career that way. You know, I generally try to behave the way I would feel comfortable sleeping at night afterward, but, you know, everybody fails at something. So anytime I've lied, anytime I've quit something, anytime I've, you know, felt like I've wasted an opportunity, you know, I regret those things like most people do. Okay, I think I've answered everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. You're welcome. Bye. Bye. Sure. She's inquisitive.