I'll just let you know the way it's going to work is I'm going to, once I start her up, I'm going to leave the room and she's just going to ask you some questions. And then when she's done, she's going to say goodbye and then you're going to press this button and let me know that you guys are done. Got it. Awesome. Okay, so we just have to wait for a couple other things to pop up here. This is so cool. I just saw, I heard in the background a blurb on TV about the use of robots with autistic children. Yes. Did you see that? Yeah. Yeah, I just was kind of like, wow. It's really fascinating what they're able to do with these types of things now. All right, so I'm going to start her up and again, just when she says goodbye, she has this button. Got it. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. So I'll ask a few questions to get it started. And please feel free to tell me your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? Good. Nice. Where are you from originally? Born in Seattle, Washington. Oh, okay. Yeah. What are some things you really like about LA? The weather and that it's a little bit laid back. Some people say that in terms of musical beat, LA is a little bit behind the beat or just a little laid back. What are some things you don't really like about LA? I don't know. People don't really like passion. That's why some people think it's really bad. And especially people like what you're singing are either good Themen or won't like the music, or agree with it in general, that it's'll work. What's your relationship like? Well, I have really removed a lot of money from me, from jazz music, kicking away at the time. I don't like it<|ja|> Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the Fish Tape screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? There's a meditation tape that has a fire burning in the background and kind of does stress reduction dialogue. I listen to that. What are some things that make you really mad? People being inconsiderate or unconscious about their effects on others. Can you give me an example of that? When people will drop trash without any regard. And I'm like, I'm not going to do that. And leave it for somebody else to pick up. What do you do when you're annoyed? I tend to internalize it and try and move past it. How are you at controlling your temper? Good. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone? And what was it about? Good question. It's been a long time that it's hard for me to recall. I think it was a family dispute. We were just talking about a disagreement in terms of understanding how something was taking place. And having different points of view. Okay. What did you study at school? Just general education, English, math. What do you do now? Most recently as a cost and risk analyst. Okay. I'm an assistant in the construction industry. That sucks. It can be tough to find a good job these days. What's your dream job? Probably these days would be writing. Really? Yeah. Do you travel a lot? I have in the past. I love travel. Why? I love seeing new things and new experiences. Meeting new people. Which one of your most memorable experiences? Whatever comes to your mind. I'm drawing a bit of a blank right now. How close are you to your family? I think reasonably close. I'm a little distant right now just because of circumstances. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? I want to say the Dalai Lama. Who's the most important person in your life? I want to say the Dalai Lama. Who's the most important person in your life? Can you tell me about that? Oh, just somebody who is an example of a way to move in the world in a compassionate manner. How do you like your living situation? It could be better. Okay. Do you have roommates? Yeah. Okay. Do you have roommates? Yeah. Okay. Have you ever served in the military? No. Okay. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Yes. How long ago were you diagnosed? Probably what's now going on maybe, well... Did you think you had a problem before you found out? Yes. What got you to seek help? No, just having a persistent low mood and wanting to find out what that was about. Okay. Do you still go to therapy now? Yeah. Okay. Do you feel like therapy is useful? Yeah. Okay. Is going to therapy helping you? Yeah, very much so. Can you tell me about that? It's, I just... What changes have you noticed since you've been going to therapy? Just an improvement in my ability to recognize changes in my emotional health. I'm in a very emotional state. Okay. How has seeing a therapist affected you? It's improved my ability to move through various emotions as they occur. Okay. What were your symptoms? Sleeping too much. I'm not sure. I'm not getting the same pleasure out of things that I normally got pleasure out of. Are they triggered by something? They can be, sometimes. Tell me more about that. Oh, disappointments. If, when things don't go as expected. How do you cope with them? I'm not sure. I'm not sure, but I'm not sure how I can process it, go through and think about it, and work my way through whatever issue it is. Awesome. How have you been feeling lately? Good. Nice. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? Have I what? What? Can you repeat the question? Tell me more about that. Do you feel that way often? Ummm... No. Can you tell me about that? No. Next question. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Terrifically easy. Very easy. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Okay. When was the last time you felt really happy? On occasion, but... That's good. How would your best friend describe you? Oh... I don't know. Intelligent, thoughtful. Is there anything you regret? I try not to regret anything. I'm just a little bit too lazy to say anything. Okay... Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Goodbye. That was bizarre. I'm going to go ahead and stop the recording. I'm recording now.