how to answer you and how to keep the conversation moving. Okay. So she also uses software that incorporates the webcam and the Xbox Kinect. All right. And she uses that to recognize your facial expressions and your posture so that she can take your feelings into account as the interview progresses. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. All right. Okay. Yes. Say again. Say again. Say again. San Bernardino, California. Okay. The weather is nice. What else do I like about L.A.? It's very sunny. It's very sunny. And I like the people here. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? I don't like how spread out it is. And along with that, I don't like the lack of public transportation. And I don't like that everything shuts down at 2 a.m. An introvert? Yes, I do. Why? Why?, because I tend to be very stoic. I don't tend to, I don't know, express myself so much. And I tend to be very reserved and not really forthcoming about my feelings, etc. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on a bedtime screen saver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best day of God. What do you do to relax? I'm not sure I understand the question exactly, but I can't really say. I just retreat within myself and I don't tend to express what I'm thinking or feeling. That makes sense. What do you think of your life? Say again? Say again, please. What do you do when you're annoyed? What do I do when I'm alone? I ride a bicycle a lot. I ride a bicycle like very like everywhere. I'm a bicycle commuter. And I also, like when I'm alone, like on the bus, I'll read, I'll bring a book with me and I'll read a lot. How are you controlling your temper? I'm very good at controlling my temper. I don't, I mean, I'm so good at repressing my feelings that I very rarely express my anger. I mean, I don't know. I don't really express anger. Also, I don't really feel anger because I'm not an angry person. I may be very disappointed when something bad happens, but I won't erupt in a rage. I don't really feel rage. But I, you know, I'm sort of exposed to it all the time on the road. I see people like, you know, yelling at each other and screaming. And so it's, yeah, I sort of like cultivate my serenity. I'm a little bit of a grumpy person. When was the last time you argued with someone? And how did they help? Last time I argued with someone, it would have been a job-related argument. And what did you study at school? What did I study in school? I studied English. Oh, okay. And what did you do now? American literature. What do you do now? Currently I'm unemployed. My most recent job was as a tutor. And before that I've been a grant writer, payroll clerk. I've had like an assortment of jobs. What can you tell us about a good job you've been in? I've been in the university. Yeah, I agree, I agree. What's your dream job? What's my dream job? I'd like to be an editor. I'd like to, like, edit publications. Or, like, write stories for publications. I feel more comfortable being an editor. I feel more comfortable, like, working with prose than with, I guess, producing my own, though. So, I'd like to be, like, a publications editor. Really? Yeah, yeah. Travel a lot? Travel a lot? I'd like to travel. I've traveled before. What's one of your most memorable experiences? One of my most memorable experiences. I... How close are you to your family? I'm pretty close to my family. I moved out, I moved back out here to be closer to them about two years ago from Chicago. And so I'm closer to them now, but I don't know. It was kind of a mistake professionally because I haven't been able to get anything going out here. And so I probably should have stayed in Chicago. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? Say again? I'm sorry. I don't really understand. Tell me more about that. I'm afraid I... Well, Chicago. It was fun over there. I was working as a grant writer and I went there for grad school, but I ended up dropping out of grad school, but finding work and staying there for five years. I like it a lot. How do you like your living situation? My living situation? I'm okay with it right now. I'm living with a relative. It's not like I'm going to be living with a friend. It could be better, but right now I'm unemployed and it's like they didn't even say I'm free. And so I'm okay right now with where I'm at, but I really do need to find another job so I can get myself stabilized. Okay. Do you have a roommate? Yeah. I'm living with my uncle. Okay. And I'm working with my uncle. And like I say, it's his place and so he's kind of eccentric. I don't know how else to describe him. He's pretty out there, but anyway, he's an okay guy. Okay. Have you ever served in military? Do I have a source of what? What? I'm sorry. Do I have a... I can really barely hear what you're saying and it's hard for me to understand you sometimes, but I'll wait for you to answer me again or to ask me another question. Okay. Have you ever been back to the military? No, I haven't. Okay. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No, I haven't, but I've often felt depressed, but I've never had a diagnosis of depression. Okay. How have you been feeling lately? I've been feeling good lately. I mean, relatively. I mean, apart from being depressed, I've been feeling good. I'm also being unemployed and feeling like really angsty over that. That's, you know, I'm in a position where I can sort of like survive out here, which is important, and you know, I'm not homeless, which is important. So I feel okay. I mean, yeah, I could be doing a lot better. On the other hand, I'm not on the streets and things could be much worse. Okay. No, I haven't. Can you tell me about that? I'm not sure what the question was. I thought you said some kind of therapy. I've been in therapy before, but it hasn't... I don't know. I was mostly there because I liked the therapist, and it wasn't really... It didn't really help me out so much, I guess, work out my issues, but I enjoy talking to the therapist, and I guess that's kind of a parallel situation to this scenario, talking to a virtual human. You just... Have someone to sit with for a while who will listen to you. It's... Yeah, it can be very soothing, especially if you have a pleasant personality. Do you feel that way often? Do I feel that way often? Well, do I feel like I need to talk to someone very often? Sometimes. I mean, yeah, I do repress emotions. I mean, pretty much... I assume, like, if I were ever to become close with someone, I would have someone I can share my thoughts and feelings with, but... And it's like... I guess you could say I do feel... What's the word? I feel lonely, or not... I got... Not lonely, but I'm sort of very self-contained within... What's the word? Within my own sort of sense of self. My own feelings. And I don't really... Have a need to reach out as much because... I'm a practic... God, I practice meditation and I sort of... It sort of helps me, like, sort of retreat into myself and, like, sort of, like, find serenity. I sense a serenity through a lack of desire. And so, that helps me with... I don't know. I don't know. I guess, like, loneliness, but also... I mean, maybe it also causes, like, you know, like, a problem in that, you know, I actually don't reach out to people as often as I should and I definitely neglect good relationships because of that and it may all be just, like, self-centeredness, you know? But... I'm trying to... Yeah... It's just, like, I wanna try to find a way to, like, engage with people without feeling without really allowing myself to let them down, so to speak. And so that is one of the things that inhibits me from reaching out to people is the idea that I could potentially let them down if they were to place their faith in me or their trust in me. And so I'm very reluctant to do that. Go on. How easy is it for you to get a good answer? Go on. What are you most afraid of? I'm probably most afraid of being a failure, not being a success, not finding a stable job, not being able to settle down, essentially, and getting married. It's, um, I don't know. I'm okay with being single. I'm not okay with being jobless. And so it's like one of those things. It's just like, uh... I just, um, I don't feel like I can reach out to people because I don't have a job, and I don't want to bring them into my life. So right now I'm not in a position to have people. I mean... I have a lot of friends, so to speak, because I can't, like, really go out, and I can't, um, you know, spend money at, um, in restaurants or in clubs or whatever. So I'm on a bicycle a lot, and I, um, I think a lot, I meditate a lot, and I, um, I read a lot of, um, literature. Sure. Okay. When was the last time you felt really happy? Uh, when was the last time I felt really happy? Well, just last weekend. I was at my, um... my aunt and uncle's, uh, 50th wedding anniversary, and it was a nice occasion. It was a really... It was, you know, their whole family was there. Our family was there, and, um... It's, like, my own parents' 50th anniversary, and it was, like, 50 years together. And... I felt really happy for them. I felt really happy that, um, I guess both of them had provided us with, like, a really, um... a really great childhood. And... It seems strange, I guess, like, with that kind of starting point. Like, that's, I mean, I mean to, uh, yeah, I guess, like, to be floundering right now. But, um... I felt happy for them. I think, um... I guess, uh, occasions like that are probably gonna become rarer, um, on a societal level. But that's, um... Um... Sort of, like, beyond my own sort of, like, realm of happiness. Anyway... Um... It's a go on. But, yeah, I felt happy this weekend at my, um... my, uh, aunt and uncle's 50th, um, wedding anniversary. Um... Other than that, I usually feel happy when I'm on the road, um, on a bicycle, and I'm going pretty fast. Um... Currently, I'm going to Wimbledon because it's, you know, and, uh... I'm visiting my mom really early, so I'm really excited. Ah, that's awesome. So I've been to some Wimbledon regular places. Marva, I kinda heard about, uh, you guys were going through, uh, listening to ipage. This is 마りंе rég nein уг passionate Holding a thought function. It's a deck of cards. she was going through her own like very deep depression and I was kind of trying to like coax her out of that. But at the same time, I was going to depress myself. And so I asked her if being around me brought her down at all. And she said, no, it's it made her I mean, it made her feel happy that I that I that I had like that I take an interest in her. But what's the word that sort of like my sort of like my depression wasn't like really didn't have anything to do with her depression. It was her depression was like completely unrelated to like how I felt. And so like, I don't know, in both our cases, it was just good to have someone else to be around who had some respect for. I guess like how we felt or like our mutual sort of like lack of feeling, if I can put it that way. And so, yeah, that's how she would describe me. I mean, as being very, as seeming very depressed all the time. And she's my best friend at this moment. Anything I regret? Uh huh. Me. All right. Thank you. Goodbye. Bye. Hello. How's it going? It was kind of interesting. I should have told you, my ears are kind of clogged, and so I had trouble hearing her at some points. I'm sorry. You can take the microphone. Okay. But I tried to, like, answer what Ashita had to say. That's what I was talking about. So you can take your number out. Oh, yeah.