I have a research experience here, but I already have my master's. Okay. All right. Actually, you're going to see our virtual human here for a second. Okay. She's going to pop up, and I'm going to shrink her back down as I continue setting up our equipment. So what's going to happen is she's going to ask you a bunch of questions once we leave the room, and then once she's done, she'll say goodbye, and then you're going to press this button. So let me know you're all done. Okay. We'll keep this setting up going around here. By the way, I told Claudia I was going to send her an email. We're having, I'm bringing the Mwamba Children's Choir from Uganda to the VA grounds on August 3rd. It's open to the public, lots of good food and entertainment. We're honoring World War II veterans. Wow. You're going to send that to Claudia? Yeah, I'm going to send it to her for everyone. There's no charge. And if you want to get a preview, go on to YouTube and look at Mwamba, M-W-A-M-B-A, Mwamba Children's Choir. Wow. They're amazing. I saw them. I saw them a month ago, and I said, I've got to find a way. First time ever on the West Coast. They've been in the United States on the East Coast once before. And there are 20 of them from 9 to 14. Some are from an orphanage. Some have their families. And they're just, the energy, it is totally amazing. It blew me away. I watched 400 people jumping to their feet cheering. I said, I have to bring that to the veterans. Wow. So they're coming. They'll be at the Seven Day Adventist Church sometime middle of July. They'll be at the veterans' home where I am on the 18th of July. And then they'll be out on the Great Lawn on August 3rd. So it'll be the August 3rd event. And great. They're bringing it, trailering in barbecue for everybody. And it's going to be a wonderful day. I'm so glad you're sending that to Claudia because there's a lot of people. Well, anytime we have anything, we'll send it. You know, you're more than happy. And I'll give you my email address too. Okay. And I don't think I do. But I may. Yeah, you sent me an email. Okay. And I noticed you have military, which I understand are from West Point. Mm-hmm. Okay. And they would, I mean, we're going to have generals. We're going to be honoring World War II people. They might love to come. Oh, yeah. And when Claudia sends an email, it goes to everyone. So that's perfect. Great. So thank you. Sure. Sure. And it turned out to be from East Point. Thank you for having me. this letter. This is your last one. I have to see the future last so. All right. Just now we heard you mention war in acedeo in before the conference. Yes.area. This person probably said that he's didn't store much information. He said all of his social starts in Vietnam were in Export. Yeah. But he's not. Okay, we'll do it. Can you turn up the volume just a bit? Fine, thank you. Boston, Massachusetts. Okay, so, I'm going to go ahead and start the recording. What are some things you really like about LA? People, first and foremost. I'm very involved with the veteran community, and I'm a chaplain entering my 52nd year. What are some things you don't really like about LA? Traffic. But that's true anywhere. I see what you mean. Do you experience virtual traffic? What do you enjoy about traveling? The experiences, the food, the culture. I've traveled to 44 countries in my career. I'd like to hear about one of your trips. I was stationed in Paris, France. I've traveled to France, Spain, Morocco, Libya, and Germany as part of my chaplaincy service. It was unbelievably exciting. What was your favorite part of your trip? Visiting Sac Le Coeur in Montmartre in Paris on my first day in France, in Europe. What did you study at school? I graduated with a degree in psychology from Boston College. What do you do now? I'm retired, but I'm still very active as a volunteer at the prison. I'm a prison in Chino, a women's prison, and I conduct services at a Jewish community that I established 51 plus years ago. What's your dream job? Actually, I've been living my dream job since I was 17 years old. I've been serving in the chaplaincy as a Jewish chaplain. My dream job is to become a rabbi in the country. I'm a rabbi in the country. I want to be a rabbi in the country. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Quite outgoing. Why? Because I'm able to be dropped into a room of 500 or 1000 total strangers, and I'm able to express myself and express my thoughts. and get to know them and have them get to know me without any discomfort. Tell me about your relationship with your family. I'm divorced. I was married for 16 years. I have a daughter. She's been the light of my life, my entire life. I have a brother and sister-in-law living back in Boston. My parents are deceased. I actually have a fish tank and aquarium, and instead of turning it on and seeing virtual fish, I watch the real thing. I also... I also like to go fishing, deep-sea fishing. How are you at controlling your temper? I'm able to do that quite well. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? I would say it was several months ago, and it was about language. I was dating someone, and I thought her language was inappropriate. And at first I thought I would say nothing, and then I decided I should tell her what I was thinking, and so I did. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. The last time I saw my former wife, she had created some legal problems, and she had created some problems for me, and I was not as polite as I might have been. I felt she was totally wrong and out of line. It's been a very difficult and acrimonious divorce. It took 13 years to resolve. All right. All right. What's something you feel guilty about? Well, I feel guilty about one thing. I feel guilty about a lot of things. And that's that I, in the last few years, have not spent as much time with my daughter. I was quite ill and ended up having open-heart surgery. And that was time when really she was abandoned. I was always there to be buffer between my former wife and my daughter. And when I was suddenly taken ill, it took me about two years to really become healthy again. And during those two years, she had to fend for herself. From the ages of 15 to 17. Difficult time for a daughter to be on her own with a mother who's not as nurturing as one would like. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. That was the hardest decision, ironically, was, you know, do I have the right to be a mother? I had the surgery now and tried to save my life, knowing that I would be abandoning my daughter. Abandoning in the lesser sense of the word. We were still in contact. But I couldn't be there to run interference for her. Or put it off and maybe suffer the consequences. So I made the decision to have the surgery. Mm-hmm. So you had the surgery. And then you had the surgery. Mm-hmm. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. The only real negatives in my life have been in connection with a divorce. I never thought I would be divorced. I always wanted to be married and have four children and the white picket fence. Well, I got married and I had a child. And had the white picket fence. Actually built it. So, but that was the toughest thing for me. Adjusting to divorce. I never thought it would happen. Nobody in my family on either side has ever been divorced. Mm-hmm. Have you ever served in the military? Yes. I was in the Air Force. I was in the Air Force during Vietnam War. How old were you when you joined the military? Seventeen. I was going to go to Hebrew Union College, a Jewish seminary in Cincinnati, Ohio. The war was raging in Vietnam and there was a need for chaplains. And I was asked if I would serve. And so I did. And I originally thought it would be two years. And then it was three. And then it was four. And then they added more time. So it was four years and two months. I don't regret a day of it. But fortunately, I served in Europe, not in Vietnam. I was never shot at. I never had to kill anybody. But I really enjoyed my military service. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Why did you decide to enlist in the military? Why did I decide to do what? Why did I decide to go into... Are you happy you did that? Yes. Going into the military was an opportunity for me to travel the world and do what I love doing. And I've continued doing it for the rest of my adult life. Did you ever see combat? Never. Not a day. But it was the luck of the draw. When you put on the uniform, you go where the government sends you. I could have just as easily been shipped off to Vietnam. About 55 of the 60 people with whom I trained went to Vietnam, and fewer than 50 returned. Very high mortality. I'm sorry to hear that. How easy was it for you to go back to civilian life? Very easy. Because of the type of service I had, it was as close to civilian life as one could have. What did you do after the military? Started a business. Ran the business while I continued as a volunteer chaplain. And I've been doing that. I still do it to this day. All right. I'm 68. How did serving in the military change you? It didn't change me as much as it allowed me to broaden my horizons. Here I was coming from Boston, basically a kid. And I find myself traveling the world. And in a very responsible position, conducting religious services and teaching and working with other chaplains of other faiths. A lot of interfaith work in the military. Marvelous experience. I don't know anyone else who's ever done it quite the way I've done it. I hold the record in Europe. For on Passover, we had 16 Passover Seders in eight days in five countries. I'm sorry. Why are you sorry? How have you been feeling lately? Very good. Tell me more about that. About feeling good? I've been very fortunate since having open heart surgery. I've been relatively healthy. And I'm very involved in the community. And I enjoy every aspect of that. Sometimes it's very tiring, but it's a good tire. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? I don't understand. Have I ever done what? All right. How easy is it to change your behavior? How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Very easy. I usually retire about 11, 30, 12 o'clock at night and sleep through for six to seven hours. What are you like when you don't sleep well? It's usually as a result of being ill. If I have the flu or cold or whatever, then I'm sluggish the next day or for two days. But I'm usually able to bounce back. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No, I have not, fortunately. How long ago were you diagnosed? I've never been diagnosed with PTSD. What were your symptoms? I've never been diagnosed with PTSD. Are they triggered by something? You're asking me questions that I've already answered that I've not been diagnosed with PTSD. So they're not triggered since they don't exist. Can you tell me about that? I just did. How do you cope with them? It's one of the frustrations of dealing with a virtual person is you're pre-programmed, so you're not asking the right question. Tell me more about that. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. . . . . . . . . . What is your next question? Do you feel therapy is useful? I think it is for some people, yes. Probably for most. Tell me more about that. I think it is a very useful tool and many people have been successful in receiving therapy. Many of the veterans with whom I live and work have had extensive therapy and it has proven to be very successful. What sort of changes have you noticed since you have been going to the hospital? I haven't been going to therapy so there haven't been changes. Alright. When was the last time you felt really happy? Yesterday. I went to a birthday party. There was somebody 85 years old and there was a great, great granddaughter who was just celebrating her first birthday. It was a fun day. That's good. Yes, it was. Who has shown that it has been a positive influence in your life? Oh, a number of people. A number of rabbis, people in the clergy generally. All of them, 25 years old, 25 years old, 25 years old, 25 years old, 25 years old, 25 years old, 20 to 30, 40 years older than I. As I was growing up, they were my mentors. How would your best friend describe you? Active, vibrant, dynamic, always having a full plate, follow through. If I start something, I finish it. And if I make a commitment, I honor it. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. I conducted services a week ago Friday night and then this past Friday conducted services at my own community. We had a wonderful musical time both times. Nice. Yes, it was. You would have enjoyed it. We didn't have any virtual people, but it was nice. What are you most proud of in your life? My daughter and the accomplishments I've had in my career. My daughter has gone on to graduate and is currently employed managing a fund at University. She'll be 27 on Saturday. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. You're welcome. Goodbye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. A couple of comments.