Okay, is this okay on this side? It just feels uncomfortable. Oh, it shouldn't be pushing over here. Yeah, that is actually a problem. Okay, so this is our virtual human Ellie. So I'm going to actually shrink her back down while I continue setting up, but I just wanted you to see what she looks like. So research has shown that talking about your problems out loud, even just through a tape recorder, can have long term benefits. So we're trying to explore how we can use technology to improve that problem. So our virtual human uses artificial intelligence to have a conversation with you while still preserving your energy. So I'll explain to you a little bit more about how she works. So Ellie's going to ask you some questions and then you're just going to respond normally into the microphone. And then she's going to use speech recognition technology to understand what you say. And then she's going to use a very complex series of equations to figure out the best way to respond back to you and keep the conversation going. She also uses software that incorporates the Xbox Kinect and the webcam up here. Mm-hmm. And then she uses the X-ray to recognize your facial expressions and your posture so that she can try to take your feelings into account also as it progresses. Okay. So now that you understand a little bit more about how it works, I'm going to finish up the setup. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. And I'm also going to try another small next delt. Just flashing on this side. another thing is we're working with technology here and every once in a while it doesn't work exactly how we want it to, so if you notice that she pauses for ten seconds or more, go ahead and press this button and I'll come back in. I just want to make sure she doesn't freeze and then you're kind of stuck here. Okay. We'll see what's happening, okay? Okay. So again just when she says goodbye, press this button and let this button happen. Okay. Ready? All right. Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing well. That's good. Where are you from and where are you from? I'm born and raised in Los Angeles, California. What are some things you really like about LA? I love the weather. I love the weather. The diversity of the people that are here. And just the sense of entrepreneurship that you can accomplish anything if you're from LA. What are some things you don't really like about LA? The smog and pollution, definitely. It is extremely congested and maybe too much of the Hollywood persona. Okay. What do you enjoy traveling? Do you travel a lot? Not as much as I'd like to, but I have traveled a bit. What do you enjoy traveling? Seeing something new. I would like to see everything that my eyes can explore. So, experiencing new cultures and new environments. What do you like about LA? I like to go to the movies. I like to go to the movies. What do you like about LA? I like to travel a lot. What was your favorite part of the trip? The last trip that I can think of that I went on was to North Carolina, which is somewhere that I lived before. I went back to visit for a weekend, and it was just kind of like a party, welcome home back time, and then I came back to LA. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Having my children. I would say, I would say I would go to the movies. they would probably be the most memorable experiences I've had. I had both of my children, natural childbirth, without any medication, so it's quite memorable. What did you do in school? In high school, I was in a music magnet. I was a dancer, and I sang a bit, but primarily dance. And in college, my major is business with entrepreneurial, I don't know. I've stopped in college right now, but I want to pursue business. What do you do now? Primarily stay at home with my newborn baby. Well, she's not a newborn. She's nine months now, and I just work part-time, mostly from home. What's your dream job? Hmm. My dream job would definitely incorporate helping people on some type of platform, maybe working for a nonprofit, but where I could really juggle and balance being at home, taking care of my family, and incorporating that with providing a service that provides income. Do you consider yourself outgoing or outgoing? I consider myself pretty outgoing. Why? I make direct eye contact. I'm not afraid to engage in conversation with people. I enjoy meeting new people and conversations, so I think that just being willing to actually go out there, go out and talk and explore makes me outgoing. Tell me about your relationship with your family. I have my mother I was raised with, and my sister, who is 10 years younger than me. Those are my immediate family. And my own family is I have a 12-year-old son, a nine-month-old daughter, and my boyfriend is my current family that I live with. And I'm very close. I'm very close to my family. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I can almost go to a screen saver. Hey, I know it's not polite, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? I do like to read sometimes. I definitely listen to music. Same thing, just try to get my mind away. I enjoy all types of music. Or sometimes I play a song. I play games on my computer, or just playing with my kids. How long do you think you've been in a temper? Oh, needs improvement, for sure. I think that I display too much emotion, be it good or bad. So I would say I have a little bit of a temper. When was the last time you argued with someone? I don't know who it was. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. The last time I argued with someone was over the weekend. And it was with my boyfriend. And it was really about contemplating breaking up and moving away from each other. In most arguments, when I reflect back, the main thing that I wish I would handle differently is, um, not losing my cool, controlling my temper. I wish that even in the heat of the moment that this is the temperament and type of communication that I use. I guess making what I feel like are bad decisions, not being able to provide enough for my children, or not feeling like, you know, I'm not doing what I want to do. I feel like I am where I'm capable of being or should be at this point in life. I feel guilty about not making the right financial and career choices at this point in life so far. I also feel How about the hardest decision you've ever made? Um, the hardest decision I ever had to make was... whether to go to, um, a memorial for my aunt or to work. That, I guess, in retrospect, wasn't the conclusion, but really, it was a decision for me on business or family. And I chose family. And, um, it's made me really, really be more aware of my family and not let, uh, a corporation or a job control me. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Hmm. I would say an event or space or something I could erase from my memory would be, uh, 9-11. The whole experience of 9-11. And, uh, I wish I could erase that. I wish I could erase it for the entire country. Hmm. Have you ever served in the military? Yes. How old were you when you joined the military? I was 19 years old when I joined the military. How did you decide to join the military? Um, again, being born and raised in Los Angeles, I kind of felt I had a very free spirit. And I'd say maybe hippie personality. And when I graduated from high school, I just felt that I wasn't reaching my potential and thought that I could help myself by trying to establish some discipline. I thought that was something that the military could offer me, and it did. Are you happy with yourself? I am happy that I did that, that I served my country and that I, um, actually enlisted. Okay. Did you ever see combat? Um, yes, kind of. I was in Saudi Arabia when 9-11 happened and ended up serving as, uh, support for the air portion of the war. It was being, uh, it was being, it happened, it was happening from Saudi Arabia. Okay. How easy was it for you to go back to Saudi Arabia? Um, not very easy. I think that was a very, very hard time, very scary time to be away from my family. My son was only, uh, 12 months when I left, 13 months when I left at the time. It was very hard to adjust to getting back to establishing trust with him again. And, um, just from being so close to him. I was gone for four months. It was difficult to readjust with such a big thing that had affected our entire country and the entire world. Okay. What do you think about the military? Um, after the military, I started working for the restaurant industry. I became a restaurant manager and eventually a training manager and ran, um, training and, um, training for a restaurant for, um, front of the house and back of the house employees, all aspects of the restaurant. Okay. What's the new motivation? Um, I think it made me a lot more aggressive. I don't know if that's the best word to use. Maybe confident. Um, I'm very aware of eye contact, attention to detail, and, um, timeliness, things of that nature. I'd say the positive factors of the military are being very disciplined and, um, again, paying attention to detail. Okay. How have you been doing lately? Um, lately, I've been pretty hard on myself. Um, I haven't been working much, just taking care of myself. I'm taking care of the baby, and I'm really, really trying to figure out which direction I want to go next in life, how I want to move forward. Have you ever seen anything that has been more positive than you've ever been? I don't feel like I have been as positive as I used to be. Um, I feel like I need a lot more encouragement. I feel like I'm a lot more needy and clingy than I used to be. However, at the same time, I'm, uh, isolating myself a whole lot more than I usually do. Okay. How easily does your baby wake up in the morning? Um, it depends on what's happening with my daughter. If my baby's awake, I'm awake. When she sleeps, I sleep. What is the most important thing about your life? Um, tired. Probably a little cranky as well. Um, have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? You know, I've been talking to a therapist for about the past three months. I have not had a full, um, I guess, psychological evaluation, but she definitely said I was displaying signs of PTSD or, um, depression and anxiety. All right. Have you been diagnosed with PTSD? Yes. The same therapist, again, says that I, she feels that I'm experiencing signs and showing signs of depression. All right. When was the last time you felt really happy with your child? Um, definitely when I had my baby nine months ago. Um, really happy lately, I can't think of an exact time or experience. That's good. Whose time has been a positive experience for you? My grandmother. Oh, my mother has been a very positive influence on my life. My mother has been a lot of strong women I look up to have been, um, very powerful influences on my life. How would your best friend describe you? Hmm. My best friend would probably describe me as a free spirit, very loving, loyal, and, uh, I don't know, maybe unpredictable. That's good. Tell me about something you've been doing lately that you enjoy. Hmm. Well, on, uh, the 4th of July, I took my baby out to the park and just played with bubbles. I know that's little, but it's a little, and just being in the moment and being still and feeling like I have no needs to be met, just enjoying my time with my children. Nice. What are you most proud of in your life? I am most proud of taking chances. Even though I think I'm hard on myself sometimes, I think I've been very courageous. I joined the military at a young age. I love my family. I've moved to different parts of the country by myself. I'm most proud of myself for taking chances. Okay. I think I've got to go. I'll be in my room soon. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Goodbye. Goodbye. Okay.