Now I'm going to bring up our virtual movie maker just a second here. You'll get to see what she looks like. I'm going to try to put her back down. While I do that, I'm going to have you put your hands behind me. Just like this. It's almost as old as some of those pictures. Okay. There we go. Perfect. I'm going to put this behind your body also. Okay. All right. So we can wait for a couple other things to pop up. A few caveats before we get started. As you've seen today, technology does not always work perfectly. So while you're talking to her, she's going to pause certain times because she's trying to let you talk and things. Okay. If you notice a pause that's ten seconds or longer, please go ahead and press this button and let me know. It's not supposed to happen. Every once in a while it happens, so I don't want you to be sitting here wondering what's going to happen next. Okay. Another thing is that a lot of people would love to ask Ellie, that's her name, I'll ask her some questions about herself, but unfortunately she's not yet capable of answering questions about herself. So she'll be the one asking all the questions. So just letting you know that you won't be able to ask her anything. So when I leave the room, she's going to start asking you questions. Okay. And then when she's done, she's going to say goodbye and then you're going to press this doorbell to let me know that you guys are all done. All right. Okay. I'm going to set her up now. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I just wanted to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask you some questions to get started. And please feel free to comment on them. Your answers are only one-to-one. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm fine. That's great. Where are you from originally? From Oregon. And from Los Angeles. What are some things you really like about LA? I like the beach, the city, how close everything is. You can do anything here. What are some things you don't really like about LA? The traffic. I see what you mean. Do you travel a lot? Sometimes. I've been quite a few places. What do you enjoy about traveling? Getting away, trying to go see other places, other historical things. I'd like to hear about one of your trips. Just recently I went to Italy. We went and saw Pisa and Rome and Florence and Napoli. What's one of your most memorable experiences? What did you study at school? I'm studying aeronautics. What do you do now? Right now I'm unemployed. All right. What's one of your favorite things about LA? What's your dream job? To design UAVs. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? More outgoing. Why? I like to be out in the middle of things. Tell me about your relationship with your family. It's all right. I mean, only my mom's left. I'm not sure about your family. What do you do when you're bored? Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best save guide. What do you do to relax? I play video games or watch movies. How are you at controlling your temper? Good. I don't really have anger problems. When was the last time you argued with someone? I don't know. What do you know about? I don't even remember. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. Whatever comes to your mind. I really can't think of anything. What's something you feel guilty about? I don't know. I don't really feel guilty about anything. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. I think that would be joining the army. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. I don't really have anything that I'd like to erase from my memory. Tell me about a situation that you wish you could erase from your memory. I don't really have anything that I'd like to erase from my memory. Have you ever served in the military? Yes. How old were you when you got into the military? 24. How did you decide to join the military? My life was kind of stuck so I needed to change something up. The army was a good choice. Are you happy you did that? Yes. Are you happy you did that? Okay. Did you ever see combat? Yeah, I did one combat tour. Uh-huh. How easy was it for you to go back to civilian life? Pretty easy. It wasn't a real rough deployment. Okay. What did you do after the military? I am going back to school. All right. How does serving in the military change you? I don't really think it changed me all that much. I mean, I think I might be more responsible now. All right. How have you been feeling lately? Just fine. Can you tell me about that? Not much to tell. Just going day by day. I feel fine. Have you noticed any changes in your living here or thoughts lately? Nope. Uh-huh. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Pretty easy. I sleep fine. What do you like when you don't sleep well? I'm like a zombie. Okay. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? Nope. Okay. What's your favorite thing about life? I don't know. What was the last time you felt really happy? Um... I don't know. Tell me more about that. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? My wife. My best friend. Tell me more about that. She makes me want to be better. How would your best friend describe you? Awesome. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. I spend most of my time working on my cars. I got two project cars. They're a lot of fun. Nice. What's your favorite thing about life? I love being with my family. What are you most proud of in your life? My relationship with my wife. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Goodbye. I love you. I love you too. I love you too. I love you too. I love you too. I love you. I love you too. I love you too. I love you too.