Okay, so if you can put it on like this, like in the back of your head. Yeah, I'm supposed to be covering it. Is this okay? Yeah, yeah, it's just supposed to be away from your mouth. Okay. Not supposed to. Okay, thank you. Thank you. I'm going to bring Ellie up here. Ellie? Oh, what a pretty name. Does it stand for anything, I wonder? I don't know. Oh, okay. I'm impressed. I probably am. No, it's just a name. Oh, okay. And do you remember from last time? She uses the series of, oh yeah, well last time it was controlled by a person. Oh, that's right. She uses a series. Of equations, once she recognizes what you say, she'll discover or realize what to say back to you. Okay, cool. And also the view camera and the system can use space of time. Oh, I got it. It has your expression. Okay. Yeah. Alrighty, Ellie, let's go. Very soon. I don't want to forget anything. No problem. No problem. So it's tracking my facial stuff right now. Oh, okay. That is so neat. Oh, okay. Okay. So, I'm going to start the recording now. Okay. Okay. Okay. So she can ask you a series of questions. She can't answer any questions. Okay. Okay. Okay. That will be everything, right? Okay. She should not be so keen. I'm going to stop recording at this right now. Okay. Stand by. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Hi. I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I'm pleased to talk to people in safe and secure environments. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and design versions of wantamegotten Shaylon. I'd love to learn about you. I'll ask you a few questions to get started. And please feel free to contact me. Your answers are totally on the line. Okay. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing fine, thank you. That's great. Where are you from originally? California. San Pedro, California. What are some things you really like about yourself? The weather, of course. I really love the weather. Also, this is where all my family lives. So, you know, it's good to be around your family. And there's a lot to do out here. Do you travel a lot? I wouldn't say a lot. Like maybe once or twice per year. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Memorable? In a good way, I would say having my children. I have three children. So, I guess that's the most memorable. What do you study at school? Right now, I'm just doing liberal arts. So, general studies. Nothing specific. I do take a lot of science classes because eventually I do want to pursue education in psychology, but that's later on. Okay. What's your dream job? My dream job? I haven't really thought about it. I don't know. Honestly, I really don't know. Do you think that you're still a little shy? I wouldn't say shy. I'm a little reserved. I think there's a little difference. So, no, not really shy. It just takes me a little bit longer to warm up. Why? I don't know. I just like to be around people. I just like to read people before I really open up to them. See how much I'm willing to share and how much I'm not willing to share. Tell me about your relationship with your family. It's okay. I mean, I love my family. We have our ups and downs. Specifically, I guess with my mother, you know, there's a little bit more ups, but I'm the only girl, so it's expected. I have three brothers, so with that being said, it is what it is. It's good when it's good, and when it's not good, it could be better. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank screensaver. It's okay. I know it's not Hawaii, but it's a good guy. What do you do to relax? Probably watch TV or, you know, sometimes I might pick up a book or something. Magazine. See what's going on in fashion. Just something to keep my mind off things. How are you at controlling your temper? Pretty good. Oh, I also play games. I like to play games on my phone or on the computer, things like that. I wouldn't say I have a temper, you know, just average. You know, when things upset me, I deal with them, but I don't overdo it. I don't, you know, explode or anything like that. When was the last time you argued with someone? What was it about? Probably, what's today, Friday? Probably, let me see, was it yesterday? No, day before yesterday. Actually, it was with my mom, which is so funny. The argument was about... She feels that because I'm a mother, a wife and a mother, that I should not have a social life. Meaning I should be at home knitting or something. I don't know. So it was small though. It wasn't a big argument. Just, you know, I mentioned that I may go to a comedy event and she was against it. I said, well, it's really not your decision. I'm an adult. So that was about it. Tell me about a situation that you were in that was different from yours. Recently? Probably... Let me think. Oh, probably should have, you know... Oh, I know. When my husband and I were discussing relocating from California, I basically put my foot down and said I wasn't, you know, willing to do that. And I probably should have kept an open mind because there are some pros to moving or relocating. But I guess at the time I really just didn't want to hear it. So I just put my foot down and said, you know, we're not going anywhere. We're staying here. I probably should have been more understanding because he is from, you know, he's not from California. So he's probably feeling a little homesick. And I should have took that into consideration. What's something you feel goes with your life? Guilty. Probably not spending as much time with my kids. It's not because I don't want to spend time with them. Meaning not altogether. Like usually when I spend time with my children, it's separate. We're not always together. Unfortunately, because my middle son has autism, so he takes a little bit more time. So I wish that, you know, we could all be together. And I do feel guilty about that. But it's difficult. So I try to give them their own individual time. But. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Hardest decision. Probably. Oh, I know. My former occupation, my former job relocated. About an hour and a half away. Something like that. A little bit over hour, depending upon traffic. And it was a good paying job. Great benefits. Great people. But I had to basically. Lay myself off from that job, which did create a financial hardship in my family. But I didn't have a choice because of our situation with our son and having only one vehicle for transportation. It's just a lot of other factors. You know, I basically had to stop working and. That was a big decision. But, you know, I always say happiness over finances. You know, you can. I can always, you know, find another job. But, you know, having my family together and being happy. That's a different story. That's about it. Tell me about moving out or something that you wish you could have done differently. Oh, that's easy. Probably when I had my face injured when I was in the military. Yeah, I wish I could erase that. I mean, something that I see every day when I look in the mirror. I don't dwell on it. It's just there. But it is a mark on my face that I didn't deserve. You know, it was a traumatic experience. But it's been about. About 15 years or so. It's been quite a while. But if I could erase it, yeah, that would be it. Yeah. I think I would have done it. Have you ever served in the military? Yes. I was in the Navy for four years. How old were you when you joined the military? 19. Why did you decide to join the military? I didn't have any other options. I really wasn't planning on joining the military. But I just didn't want to go back to school. At the time, I just figured, you know, going to the military would give me the background that I needed and money for school. So that's the route that I chose. Are you happy with your life? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, can't change it. I mean, I'm not unhappy. I met a lot of nice people, you know, so that was good. But there was some, you know, issues that I had in the military that if I had not went, you know, probably would have been worse. You know, it went a lot differently. But, you know, you can't change the past. All right. Did you ever see combat? No. I'm glad I did it. I'm not really a combative type person. So, yeah, it's unfortunate, you know, but, no, I did it. That's amazing. How easy was it for you to get back to civilian life? The transition, it was a little difficult at first, you know, having to adjust, having to find a, you know, career and, you know, just not having that, how do you say, I guess I felt like comfort in the military because I knew that I was always going to have that paycheck. You know, as long as I did what I was supposed to do. I would always have, you know, a roof over my head, you know, things like that. You know, the civilian life, you know, you basically, it's hit or miss. You don't know. Like, you could lose your job one day or, you know, whatever. So, I don't know. It's an all right transition. I got used to it pretty quickly. That's good. Thank you. What did you do after the military? I went to school. I went to school. I started working with a communications company. I did some medical care as well. Got married, had children. That's about it. How did serving in the military change you? Made me a little bit more responsible. I know that for a fact. You know, people my age at the time, you know, didn't have a lot of responsibility. Most of them were still living at home. You know, at an early age, I was out on my own, you know, paying my own bills, things like that. So, it did give me a little bit more responsibility. Okay. How have you been feeling lately? I'm feeling okay. I don't really have any complaints. Tell me more about that. I mean, I feel fine. I don't have any complaints. I don't have any complaints about my life. You know, it is what it is. I just take it one day at a time. That's about it. Have you noticed any changes in your living or in your life lately? Yeah, probably. Nothing really to speak about. Changes in thoughts. Yeah, a little bit. Nothing dramatic. When you're getting ready to sleep? When I'm ready to go to sleep, I usually go right to sleep. Well, not as soon as my head hits the pillow, but, you know, I don't toss and turn or anything like that. What do you like when you don't sleep well? Very cranky. Very cranky. A little irritable, I guess. Have you ever been diagnosed with sleep disorders? No, not at all. Have you ever been diagnosed with depression? No, not at all. When was the last time you felt really happy? I feel like I'm always happy. I don't know. People tell me that all the time. They say I'm always smiling and things like that. So, probably this morning when I woke up. . So, that's what makes me happy. That's great. Thank you. Who is someone that has been a positive influence in your life? My mother. . As much as we argue. You know, she's such a strong person and, you know, she's really been there for me and my kids. And I just love who she is as a person. You know, she's always doing things for people. She's, you know, a good person. She means well. But she's very opinionated. How would your best friend describe you? Probably silly. I don't know. How would she describe me? She'd probably say sometimes I'm a little gullible. I don't think I am. That's what she would probably say. That's good. I don't know. Could be. Tell me about something you really enjoyed. When on our family vacation, we actually drove, which was different. We usually fly. So it was a new experience, you know, going on the road with the kitties. Nice. Thank you. What are you most proud of in your life? Wow, that's a tough question. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Oh, I didn't really... Oh, you're welcome. Goodbye. Bye. Bye. Should I press the button? Hi. That last question, I didn't really answer it, but she said, thanks. Got it. So I left it at that. She's like, what are you most proud of? I'm like, I don't know. Then she said, well, thank you for telling me. I was like, oh, shoot. I was like, oh, I was trying to get an answer. Okay, sorry. Oh, it's recording. I just yawned. Sorry. They're going to think I'm bored. No. No. No. No. No.