Yeah, I can't hear you. I'll leave it on. Okay. Yeah, it just feels, yeah, perfect. Most people don't have them. Okay, so I'm going to bring up the virtual human for this question and then check it back out. Okay. I'm going to show you the face. Okay. Otherwise, it won't work. Okay. This is Ellie. Okay. Oh, it's pretty cool. Yeah. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. It's weird. I'm going to bring it back up again and then I'm going to start the recording. Okay. Okay. And when she's done, she should say goodbye. And you can ring the doorbell. But if for any reason she stops for 10 to 15 seconds, something may have gone wrong. And you can just ring the doorbell. Okay. So just wait for her to ask questions and just answer. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Bye. Bye. Okay. Thank you. Yeah. Hi. I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Alright. Okay. So, I'm going to start the recording. Okay. Are you okay with this? Yes, I am. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing good. That's great. Where are you from originally? I'm originally from Orange County, California. Okay. And where are you from? I'm from Los Angeles, California. And now I live in Los Angeles. What are some things you really like about LA? I went to college here, so I enjoy the fact that a lot of my friends are still around. So, just the ability to see them and be able to hang out with them is really good. And obviously, the weather has been amazing all the time. So, those are the few things I like about LA. Okay. What are some things you don't really like about LA? Right. Obviously, traffic. And I don't know. I think traffic is the main reason. And aside from that, I don't have much to complain. I see what you mean. Do you travel a lot? I used to for my old job, but not anymore. So, I'm pretty much based in LA most of the time. What do you enjoy about traveling? Just the ability to see other things and explore new things, whether it be going to a new sightseeing area or trying different kinds of food. Just the fact that I'm encountering something else or something new is something I enjoy about traveling. And obviously, the people that I am with. And I enjoy traveling when I am going traveling because I rarely travel by myself. So, whether I travel with my boyfriend or friends, the fact that I have companions that I enjoy spending time with is something I enjoy. I'd like to hear about one of your trips. Sure. For the Fourth of July past weekend or two weekends ago, I actually went to San Francisco to visit my boyfriend. So, we actually... He was moving from LA to San Francisco. So, we drove up to the Bay Area, saw his family, and then stayed with my friend who recently moved into a new apartment in Oakland. So, we hung out with her, spent a day in the city, went to the ferry building, went to the fisherman's wharf, and hung out and went shopping. So, although it was kind of a bittersweet goodbye because we are now... I'm now in LA and he's in San Francisco. But... I was in LA but it was a really fun trip. What's one of your most memorable experiences? From the past trip or just in general? What did you study at school? I studied mathematics and economics. What do you do now? I am actually... I just quit my job last Friday. I'm taking some time off before I go back to graduate school. My dream job, let me think for a second. I think I'm really interested in social commerce and retail, so something that combines my interests and also gives me the ability to spend time with people I love. My previous job, I was working a lot, so I was always constantly working, and I didn't really get to see anyone or do anything on my own or have a hobby, but I want to have a job that would give me the flexibility to pursue what I want to do outside of my professional life. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Outgoing. Why? I don't know. When I meet new people or when I just hang out with people in general, I'm not shy to speak about my feelings or ask questions or engage in a conversation or initiate a conversation, so I don't consider myself shy. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Sure. My family and I are pretty close. They're back in Orange County, but I've been living apart from them for about already four years, but I still visit them almost every other weekend. We go out to dinner, and then I hang out with my mom. We have our shopping trips and spa days once in a while, so we get to bond. I think I have a pretty close relationship with my family. Most importantly, my mom. She's almost like my best friend. The last impression we had whenever we missed out on something was her What do you do to relax? We go on exhausting trips to school. We go to當然 13th Street or 7th Street, if you will. whatever you would call it. So I just kind of go on YouTube and look at my favorite YouTube vlogs from people. It's kind of like a mini reality show. So I think it's pretty fun. Other than that, I just kind of go through my old pictures to think about like fun times I've had, for example, from my trip to Costa Rica last year with my boyfriend or my trip to San Francisco with my friends. Or just kind of think about like good times I've had in the past. Or also I enjoy like exercising or being in nature. So I would go for a hike in Santa Monica or something like that. How are you at controlling your temper? I think I'm pretty good. I've never had a situation when I was out of control or, you know, I was you know, I was like, I don't know, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't I was acting like I wasn't myself. I think when I don't know, I don't think I've actually never had a situation when I was I wasn't able to control my temper. I just kind of stay calm and think about the situation and think about how I'm going to respond to it and try to respond to it wisely. When was the last time you argued with someone? And what was it about? tell me more about that let me think i i don't know i can't really remember the last time i argued with someone maybe when i argued with my old roommate about um our friendship kind of so we had a conversation about how both of us are kind of drifting apart from each other but it was more of a conversation than an argument so we were able to i mean both of us are kind of like getting heated up by the topic but we were able to just kind of cool down and talk about the situation and talk things through oh yeah sure um so i remember um a few months ago a friend of mine visited from washington dc and we went to a different friend's house in hollywood so when i was there there was this guy who kind of was very um confrontational with me about what I do or what I want to do or my stance on certain topics for example it was education and then and he started kind of saying like oh you know you're not secure about the way you are blah blah blah so I kind of was I kind of got angry at him and I just told him like you're not giving me a good first impression and you're top like what you're saying doesn't make sense and I kind of like was very um argumentative with them I wish that I was more calm and was able to kind of probe more on why he thought that way instead of attacking him verbally guilty um I'm guilty about quitting my job too early I'm going back to graduate school in the fall so I was actually supposed to stay a little later till end of July but hey I wanted to enjoy my time and just be unemployed for a little bit so I ended up quitting my job a little early which is a burden on my boss so that's something I feel guilty about sure I can talk about my recent graduate school preparation process I was deciding between Glee which is in the Bay Area and he which is in Boston I I like I mentioned before my boyfriend lives in the Bay Area and then if I were to go to Glee I can be together with him in the same area but I think once I got the acceptance letter from Glee I knew that I wanted to go there just right away so I had to decide between being with my boyfriend and being complacent and kind of comfortable in California versus venturing out into different city different state different people different environment and and be in Massachusetts. And I ended up deciding with, although it's far away from my parents, family, friends, boyfriend, but I wanted to explore something else and be in a different environment. All right. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Hmm. I don't know if I have anything I want to completely erase from my memory. Maybe when my great grandma passed away when I was in the eighth grade. I remember I was in a different room, but my grandma passed away in a different room. But had I stayed there with her, I could have kind of see her pass away, but I didn't get to do that because I was watching TV in some other room and just hanging out. I wish I could erase that from my memory because it was kind of a traumatic event in my life. Have you ever served in the military? No, I haven't. How old were you when you joined the military? I've never served in the military. Why'd you decide to enlist in the military? Oh, I did not. I have never served. Were you happy you did that? Oh, I wouldn't know because I didn't enlist in the military. Did you ever see combat? No. I'm not. I'm not. I'm not. How easy was it for you to go back to civilian life? I've never served in the military. I'm sorry. What did you do after the military? I didn't serve in the military. All right. How did serving in the military help you? I didn't serve in the military. How have you been feeling lately? Good. Can you tell me about that? You know, just I quit my job. I had a good going away party. I'm getting ready for grad school. A lot of exciting things. I'm excited and happy. Have you noticed any changes in your living here or in your life? Not really. I think I've been a lot more positive than before. All right. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Very easy. What are you like when you don't sleep well? I'm grumpy and I eat a lot more and I drink a lot of coffee. Okay. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No, I have not. When was the last time you felt really happy? Two months ago when I got my acceptance call from my dream school. That's good. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? I think first and foremost my mom. She's always reminded me of who I am and why I am on this earth. It sounds kind of philosophical, but she's been my foundation. How would your best friend describe you? They would say energetic, kind of intense sometimes, outgoing. I'm a little bit of a person who's always been a little bit of a person. The way I feel, the way I live, the way I work. Anything else you know about having a good night's sleep and enjoy the place? I was waiting on this appointment and- Any thoughts? I'm just learning. two-hour hike. It was a lot of fun and I always love hiking so that was something I really enjoyed recently. Nice. What are you most proud of in your life? I'm most proud of the fact that I was able to acclimate myself into a new environment. I actually came when I was I came here when I was when I was 13 so the fact that I got to where I am in life despite not having not learning how to speak the language about 10 years ago that is something that I'm very very proud of. Okay I think that's it. I hope you have asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Goodbye.