And she uses speech recognition to like recognize what you say and then uses a series of complex equations to know what to say back. Okay. And it's entirely automated by the computer and no one's controlling her in the back. And the reason we have the webcam and the Kinect is so that the system can also recognize your facial expressions and your posture. Okay. So I'm going to bring her up for a second and then shrink her back down and then finish the video. Alright. I like your shirt. My shirt? Yeah. Thanks. I actually just got it yesterday. I wasn't entirely sure about it actually. It looks nice. It's pretty. You look pretty. Okay. Thank you. This is a little bit of a surprise. I'm going to take this out. You can put this on. It goes around the back of your head like this and then it goes over my ears. Yeah. It kind of reminds me of like some kind of like I'm on stage or something like I sing like hey. Yeah. I wonder if I had some of the voices of some of these singers. Okay. Okay. I have a question. So you know, we talked about your hair. I love your hair. It's so cool. Actually, you know what? I was thinking I should have probably wore red pants instead of blue. But I'm like it's more blue than red. Especially with your bag. Yeah, thanks. I've been having it like 10 years. Really? Yeah. And I actually I saw it at a Virgin Makeup store in Hollywood years ago. it was the last one and at the time I had a jacket that I got customized for these so I gave away jacket and I'm like well I need to do something with the shoes are just kind of sitting there so thank you thank you okay okay okay cool she looks real that's cool yeah okay gotcha thank you yeah thanks for coming in today I'm just great to talk to people in a safe and secure environment I'm not a therapist but when I hear and learn about people and would love to learn about you I'll ask you a few questions to get us started and please feel free to talk to me about anything your answers are totally confidential are you okay with this? yes okay so how are you doing today? I'm doing pretty good happy content not stressed out so I'm good that's great where are you from originally? Los Angeles California born and raised what are some things you really like about LA? well besides it being my home I love that there are so many various things to do I don't believe you can live here and be bored if you're an active person like myself what are some things you really don't like about LA? that it's overcrowded it's just too many people here people are not more hospitable I mean if you speak to someone I feel like they should speak back and not look at you like they want to do something to you or just wake up so angry I don't like a lot of our political laws or issues that we have here and the economy. Not as much as I would like to, but yes, I do. I enjoy the whole setup, the whole agenda, the planning, the researching. I find that very exciting for me. I like exploring new places I've never been or going back to somewhere I really love. Just the thought of how much I'm going to put aside for shopping. Also, doing it for tours and picture taking, doing videos, and just creating a new experience that I had never had before. Sure. I recently just came back from San Francisco. I've been there before, but I was in one particular part of the Castro District, and I explored other parts of San Francisco. It was one of my favorite places to go. The first place I decided to go besides putting down my luggage at a hotel would be a restaurant called Skoma's, which is actually on the pier. And they have the best crab cakes ever. And the last time I went, I saw Jerry Springer, the talk show host. I did some research. I did some shopping. I actually met up with friends at some bars. I actually went, I'm a foodie, so I went to a couple of restaurants I heard about on the Food Network. I took a boat ride, and I visited some friends. So I really had a good time. I have several of those. But one of my most memorable experiences, in life, would be the day that Barack Obama became president. That was a memorable experience for me, and I wish that a lot of my family members who have passed on was here to see that. That would always stay with me like a tattoo. It's a very memorable moment that I'll never be forgetting. It will go down in history, and it is history. And it's just a great, great moment. It's a great experience for me and other people like myself to know that we have transitioned beyond race, and that, well, in some ways, and that, you know, anyone can become president and really fulfill their dreams. There's no limits. Well, it depends on, okay. I am a dispatch manager. The last school I attended was . And I have my degree in Homeland Security and Investigations. I work for a private security firm. I'm actually overseeing about 12 to 20 people a day. I work various hours, and my job was very tedious. I do a lot of problem solving, and it makes the night go by fast. I work from 10.30 to 6.30, and within the dispatch center, I should say, or command center, that I oversee. I work from 10.30 to 6.30. We do dispatch and also surveillance. So half of the night, we're looking at 20 cameras for corporate and residential accounts, and also dealing with supervisors and security officers who actually are at a site. And we put them in what's called a mobile vehicle or mobile van where they stay on site until the actual site is ready and developed for people to come through after construction. So we make sure that we obtain and make sure these places are very, well-rounded with security. We do a lot of observing and reports. So any information, anything that's happening on site for the security officers, they allow us to know about it. I do everything from inventory to attendance. Talking to other locations out of state. Making sure our data information in our systems are updated. Computer software. So anything you think about. I'm a computer software specialist. I'm actually involved in one as far as the company is concerned. So it's a very tedious but very rewarding position. What's your dream job? My dream job is completely opposite from what I have now. I've been writing some. I'm 36. I've been writing songs since I was about nine years old. It started when I was in the junior choir at church. And I've always had a passion for that. I feel like that's what I've been doing. I feel like that's what I've been doing. I feel like that's what I've been doing. It's just a part of my DNA and who I am. And my dream job would be an engineer who owns their own record label and a very big-time songwriting slash producer. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Oh, I'm definitely not shy. That's not me at all. I'm a very expressive person, as you can probably hear. I've never been shy a day in my life. But I'm more outgoing, more blunt, I would say. Why? That's just who I am. I just feel like, you know, as people, we're all, you know, made up of different characteristics and personality traits. And I just like expressing myself. I talk a lot. I get that from my father. And I just, you know, what I feel I feel like I should put out there and voice my opinion like anyone else. That's just who I am. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Interesting. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? That's a good question. I listen to music. But I like to go to the beach and take in the whole scenery just to smell the ocean, you know, water, you know, that that the whole experience of my feet in the sand, looking around, just taking in the small things, just, you know, appreciating the breeze. I do stuff like that when I get a chance to, but sometimes a glass of wine or just watching TV, having a conversation sometime, praying, you know, or whatever about anything that goes on with my family. So it's different things I do. And shopping always helps too. It's very therapeutic for me. That's number one, I would say. How are you controlling your temper? Pretty good, I would say. In my 20s, I would have a different answer for you. I was more quick tempered. I'm pretty good with that. Yes, I do get upset and angry about things. Depends on what it is. But I just think when you grow and you become, you know, you know, you get older, you know, not always maturity doesn't always come with age and knowledge. And I feel like as I've grown as a person, I'm a lot older now, more calm and more centered about things. So I don't get as angry as I used to. It is a better way to deal with things besides getting angry. A couple of days ago, and I argued with my ex-girlfriend over the state. So this is what we Сall the rules. This is what we talk about this Institute. So, you know, come to settle this issue when you meet and we talk about, you know, how you can do this, how we're going through this. I just feel that now that I'mReally talk about this issue now. I never, I had before. It was my older brother, who had so much anxiety about resuming his BJUявol. Last timeline started three months later. Hope of death. Yeah. So that means that there was no showers. I was when I went to mycart that day, it was at the point of course, debates, where you went to have sex with your husband. Manmi Quar謝 What happens to you when you were with your friends and friends? handled a lot differently. Wow, so many of those situations I wish I would have handled differently. Good question. I'm sorry for taking so long. It's just so many things I think about. Wow. Handled differently. Definitely. That's such a hard question, but you know, I can't answer that question for you. I can be a plain example. I was, I think, maybe 18 years old or 19, and my brother's a couple of years younger than me. My dad is physically abusive, and he was never there for us. He was the type of father who just kind of came around. My mom would let him whoop us. He would show up whenever he wanted to, but he wasn't a substantial father that was active in our lives. One particular time, I guess, my mom had told my dad that my brother was having company without permission. He went over there, and he beat him up really bad. The only reason I knew was because I was working for my mom at her hair salon, and he brought him up there black and blue and bloody. I felt like I had a nervous breakdown. I didn't handle that well. I felt like I should have been there to protect him. I hope I'm not going to cry. It still bothers me. I feel like I should have been there to protect him, and I wasn't. It bothers me. I take on a lot that bothers me. I wasn't there when it happened. I called social services and told them what happened. I just wish I would have took him to the hospital. I broke down, and I just wish I would have been there for him. That bothers me. I just feel like I should have dealt with it better. I just took him to the hospital instead of going in the bathroom and crying. That bothers the hell out of me to this day. What's something you feel guilty about? Just what I said about my brother. I just wish I was there for him when that happened. I wasn't, and I blame myself for it. I feel guilty about not being there for him. I feel guilty about not being there for my ex-girlfriend. Financially, at the time, I couldn't get to Vegas. So, I couldn't be there for her when she was in the hospital. Sometimes she couldn't be there for me. I take a lot on my shoulders, and I blame myself for stuff I know that I can't control. But I feel guilty about that. Very. About that and so many other things. My grandfather, Frank, passed away. He was a great grandfather. I used to ask some families, members where he was, because I didn't know where he was located, where he moved to, knew phone numbers, anything. And over the years, I was asked what happened to him. They knew the information and didn't tell me. And then I found out years later that he passed away and he was asking about me. And I feel bad, but I didn't know how to find him where he was. So, those are some of the things I feel bad for. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. The hardest decision of my life? The biggest thing I've done in my life is run away. You never served in the military, though, right? No, I've never served in the military at all, but I can give an example well I remember going to King's 이 hair salon in California, but I was in California at the time, and I was in every freedom and equalityciendo that city fear.ience. i line i remember going to the specifically color that psychology teaches in通 inserting top her shop one day just kind of hang out with her and she introduced me to a client of hers and I remember the lady saying oh I didn't realize you had a daughter I knew you had a son and this is the first time I heard that and it really got to me it hurt and I feel like there's no excuse for that and I didn't want her to explain and that just really hurt me to my core I talked to my dad about it I called him and he said oh just ignore it how do you ignore somebody saying that you don't even that you exist how to ignore that and a part of me sometimes wish I could just erase a lot of things she's done like that away because it still tends to bother me I have no military experience I've thought about in the past I've thought about it through since I actually got my degree in Homeland Security in investigation. I thought about becoming a police officer. There's so many things I thought about getting into, but with a lot of freezes on certain positions I've applied for, I just went a different direction that still had to do with some type of law enforcement like what I'm doing now, but never got into that. I have no military experience. I never signed up for the military. Just thought about it. I, well, I never really never thought about if I'm happy I didn't enlist or not. Somewhat, yeah. I'm happy with the way things are. I don't think the military would actually be for me. There's some good things about it like paying for college tuition, always having a kind of fall back on GI bills, experience of, you know, fighting for your country, but do I think that was for me? I'm kind of past that at this point. I think I'm past the age limit where you can even sign up for it, so no, I don't have any regrets. No. How easy was it for you to go back to civilian life? I have no experience in that, so I don't know. I only know people that have been in the military like my family members, uncles and aunties and, you know, that are still here or not here anymore. What did you do after the military? Um, never been in the military, so uh, I, that's, I can't answer that question. Okay. How did the military change you? I don't know. I've just heard about what people have been through after they come out of the military, but I have no idea. How have you been feeling lately? Over-stressed, happy at moments, um, feeling sometimes defeated and insecure, hurt. Um, I spent a lot of time alone. Um, is it by choice? No, but good and bad. That's not great. How do you understand the changes in your life? Yeah, um, happy a lot of times, but there's moments where I'm really, really sad as well too, so they don't really balance each other out at all. How easy was it for you to go back to civilian life? How easy was it for you to go back to civilian life? Not at all. I do so much tossing and turning for years. I don't remember the last time I got a good amount of sleep until recently when I bought this Brookstone pillow, which has been helping, but I'm still tossing and turning. And then a lot of times I'll lay there, I'll want to go to sleep and it just does not happen. And I don't know why, if it's my stress or what's going on, but my sleep patterns are not great. And I still get up and do what I have to do. Like I've had nine hours or so, so that's just me. What are you like when you're not sleep well? Active, like I am now completely wide awake. Some days I'm fatigued and tired and a little sad, but usually I'm just up and just being me and active and overly bubbly and a busy body. Normally, usually. Have you ever been diagnosed with sleep apnea? Uh, yes, in the past, um, over 10 years. A couple of years ago, I was diagnosed with that. Oh, wait, have you been diagnosed with depression? Yes. Oh, wait, when was the last time you felt really happy? Um, a couple of days ago, I felt really happy. Tell me more about that. Yeah. Well, sometimes, you know, in life, because nobody's perfect, there's things I get to, I let get to me. Um, I sometimes put the weight of the world on my shoulders and when you take care of everybody else, sometimes you get lost in that transition. And I just, you know, I'm happy to have every day. I thank God for every day I live and I'm at, I'm up and I'm able to work and do things that I need to do for myself. And I just felt happy and rested and I caught up on shows and I relax and I ate. And I just had a good day of peace and tranquility, which is not, um, it's not a regular thing for me. It's kind of rare to have those kind of days because so much is going on. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? Oh, that's easy. My grandmother. She's been passed away for about 20 years now. 20 plus, I should say. She's been the backbone of who I am. I'm so much like her. As far as hardworking, determined, strong-willed. I mean, just the glue to kept the family together. She was the backbone of our family and she's one of the, she's my hero. She did everything. She, you know, she was so selfless. She put everything on the back burner, put everybody first. Do you get what I mean? Because that's what I'm doing too. I know I get that from her, uh, just, you know, endless caring and loving. I never had to question that. And my grandmother, even she was rare. Kamadi. Yeah. We're a person of so much goodness and I just appreciate everything she taught me. She even paid for our public school. I'm sorry for our private school and help my mom and my dad when they first got married years and years ago with a second car will pick us up every day. Just did everything she could to help and was there for everybody. And then some, she is a great example of, uh, you know, a human being that went beyond the call of duty to do everything she could for her family. And she's my hero. And I'm a, I'm really, really grateful for her. I'm really proud and honored to be a part of her bloodline and I miss her dearly. How would your best friend describe you? I don't have one, but if they, if I did have one, I would say they would say that I'm a loving person. Uh, I love hard that I'm creative. I'm funny, articulate down to earth, very blunt, um, a good friend and I value friendship, you know? Um, and I made mistakes. Sometimes you piss me off. I can be a little mean and I could be sarcastic, but overall a good person. That's just too hard on herself and doesn't get herself enough credit and gets taken advantage of sometimes because of how nice I am. If I had one, I would think that it would say that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, that's an easy one. Shopping. I went to the mall and I shopped. I shopped online. I had so many packages coming from high heels, tennis shoes to jackets and cute, very creative, sexy dresses. So shopping puts my mind out of everything that we talked about as far as my feelings of hurt or insecurity, all that goes away because shopping is therapeutic. And once I get an idea in my mind, I'm coordinating colors and I just know what I'm do this and that with. I'm very creative and I like things out of the norm. So that just makes me if I could shop all the time, that would be a dream. Nice. Thanks. What are you most proud of in your life? My accomplishments with school. Me being out on my own for a long time. I've been on my own since I was 18, 19 years old. And I've. Been able to keep up my own place and I'm very responsible. I pay my bills before I do anything else for me. And I am very, I'm a stickler about paying bills and. That's just always been at the forefront to me to make sure that my household was okay before I do anything else. So I'm proud of my maturity level and my responsibility.