Okay. Hold on. Okay. And when she's done, she should say goodbye. But if... Okay. Okay. Yes. Yes. I'm doing good, thanks. I'm from Los Angeles, here in California. I love the beach, I love the weather, and I love all the things there are to do here. I don't like the smog, I don't like the traffic, and that might be, those might be the things at the top of my list. We travel a little bit, yes. What do you enjoy about traveling? I'd like to hear about one of your trips. A couple years ago, we took the kids to Acapulco for Thanksgiving. And it's not normally a time of the year that we travel, but we thought we'd try something different. And it was a great experience for them. We did all kinds of things that we normally would not have done. So it was an opportunity to sort of stretch our horizons and experience some new things. And we actually had a really great time. What's one of your most memorable experiences? One of my most memorable experiences in terms of travel, I guess, was the time that my luggage got lost in Puerto Vallarta. And I spent the week wearing my husband's shorts and t-shirt. What did you study at school? I went to fashion school for two years. And then I went to college. Then after that, I got my bachelor's. What do you do now? Now I'm a real estate agent that has nothing to do with the subjects that I studied in college, but it's a great career nonetheless. What's your dream job? My dream job would still be in real estate, but it might be such that I have the financial means that I can just do it because I love it. I love helping people secure their first property, so I work with a lot of first-time buyers. It's their foyer into wealth management. I like educating people on the process. I would probably still want to be in the business of real estate. I might actually delve more into income property ownership, but it would still be something in real estate. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Definitely more outgoing. Tell me about your relationship with your family. I have a good relationship. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the Fish Tank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? I work out to relax. Usually three to five times a week. I work out in the mornings and it does help to manage stress. In real estate and being a mom, there is lots of stress in my life. How are you controlling your temper? Getting better at it, not the best at it. I tend to be very outwardly with my emotions and am learning to try to check them at the door a lot more than I used to. So, I'm a work in progress. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? It probably was, the person was probably my husband. And the timeframe may have been a month or so ago. And quite honestly, I don't remember what it was about. So that tells you that it was probably something that was not even important. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. I wish that I would argue with my husband less, especially in front of our kids. What's something you feel guilty about? I feel guilty about arguing with my husband in front of my kids. It's something that they should be apart from and separate from. And not even be included in that. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. It was probably the decision to let my daughter move forward with the heart surgery that the doctor said that she needed. But it was a very scary time and place for us. But we moved forward with it. It was a decision that I did not make alone. I made it along with my husband. Okay. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. An event that I wish I could erase from my memory would be as a child being touched inappropriately by a family member. I wish I could erase it. Have you ever served in the military? No. How have you been feeling lately? I've been feeling fine. Tell me more about that. I've been feeling fine this summer. The work stress is still there, but my kids are out of school. So our household is a lot more relaxed. My son is actually in Sacramento for the past couple of weeks. So it's just my husband and my daughter and I. And we're sort of taking a little bit of a laid back approach to summer before our vacation comes up. Have you ever studied changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? No. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Pretty easy. Over the last two to three weeks, I think there was one night where I had so much on my mind I did find it hard to fall asleep. But in general, I do sleep well. The workouts help with that as well. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Just sort of not as social, a little more quiet. Lagging. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No, I have not. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. When was the last time you felt really happy? Today or yesterday. Just the ability to be blessed to wake up every day and have an opportunity to do something. Just the opportunity to make the best day that I can. That's a blessing. So I'm happy about that every day. That's great. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? My mother is definitely a positive influence in my life. She is someone that I go to in confidence all the time. She's a very spiritual woman and always seems to lead me or point me in the right direction. How would your best friend describe you? My best friend actually passed away, so I will use my husband, who is a really good friend actually. And at this point he is my best friend. And he would probably describe me as someone who lives my life passionately, who is very dedicated and loyal. And who wears her emotions on her sleeve. That's good. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. On Saturday, my husband, my daughter and I just, we were in Burbank handling some business. And after that it was so hot. And my daughter asked if we could go to Sherman Oaks Galleria to hang out. And it was not something that was my choice. But it was just really nice to go. And I was able to be able to hang out in a really casual environment and do something that she wanted to do. And that really pleased her. And we went shopping and we had a really good time. But ordinarily I would have never chose that activity. But because my husband and I were able to throw whatever other plans we had out the window and just enjoy her, it ended up being a nice family outing. Nice. Thank you. What are you most proud of in your life? I'm proud of my children. I have a seven-year-old daughter and a nine-year-old son. And I'm very proud of the way that they are growing up and their character and their academic skills. And really the little people that they have become. Okay. I think I've asked everything I can. Thank you. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thank you. Goodbye. Goodbye.