Oh really? Interesting. I mean, I think that's the point. She's surely working hard. Oh, you haven't talked with her yet. Okay, um, someone has had to see her at the time. Uh, you just look at Ellie. Um, if you could put on this, the way this picture is pointing to me, is that okay? I'm sorry, I thought you talked to her. It goes behind your ears like this. Okay, someone says they're dreaming. So she can ask you a series of questions, and then you can respond however you want. Right. And when she says she should say, um, goodbye, but if she for any reason pauses for like 10 seconds, something might have gone wrong. Right. Um, and so in either of those cases, uh, press the button. Alrighty. Okay, so now I'll say it. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I just wanted to talk to you. I'm a therapist. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people, and I'd love to learn about you. I'll ask you some questions, and I'll start. And please feel free to contact me. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? Alright. I suppose. Where are you from originally? Well, I was born in Philadelphia, but we lived all over the place, so I'm not from Philadelphia. I just was born there and lived there for a year. Always. What are some things you really like about LA? I love the weather. People are generally more friendly than where I've lived on the East Coast. The scenery, the environment, the beach, the mountains, the bike paths, and the availability of fresh fruits and vegetables. What are some things you don't really like about LA? The usual. The traffic. I guess some of the people in the entertainment business. A bit of the materialism. And, you know, when you meet like the stereotypical dits. I see. Do you travel a lot? I used to when I used to have a life. I've been to 41 countries, and I really enjoyed that. And I wish I could do it again one day. What do you enjoy about traveling? I guess since I'm from nowhere, it's fun to go somewhere where you don't have to fit in. You're already a weirdo, so it doesn't matter that you're not from the place. And I just really enjoy meeting people from different cultures. I love seeing new environments. I love seeing historical things or, you know, just things of incredible beauty. I love meeting different types of people. Food. I love different food. So any foods from any foreign lands are always fun. And the other thing I secretly like that I try not to get too wrapped up in is that you can completely and utterly escape and forget about your real life. I'd like to hear about women in the sex world. All right. Let me think for a minute. Gee, I don't know which one to pick. I guess I'm trying to think in my head. I probably shouldn't be overthinking. I'm trying to think, do I pick a horrible one to give you guys more emotion, or do I pick a normal one? Although I'm not so sure. My traveling companion was my, you know, husband who, I don't know what his story is. I suppose he's gay. So we went to Singapore, and it was just fabulous, except for the parts having to deal with him. I loved being there, you know, the variety of delicious, unbelievable food. I'm a huge curry laksa fan, so that was really fun. It's a big shopping place, so I kind of wished I were a bit younger because they had fabulous fashions. I liked the weather because it was hot and steamy. It was really nice. It was really easy to get around, things like that. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Let's see. For some reason, I'm thinking of a bad one. But it's nothing. I assume you mean towards travel. When I was traveling through Vietnam and Cambodia, I got a really bad case of hemorrhagic dengue fever. I was in Hoi. No, I wasn't. I was in Huey, sorry, in Vietnam. And I was horribly sick, and I was hallucinating. And my traveling companion husband person, I said, please go get me some water. I was, you know, really sweating profusely, and I'd been very sick for a while. And he went out to get the water. I don't know. It was sometime in the morning. And he came back. It was a little bit of a cold. And he came back at, I don't know, 7 o'clock at night or something and said that he'd, some fellow on a motorbike had said, let me take you somewhere where you can get some water. And I don't know what the hell he did all day long. So I just think back to then. And I remember coming in and out of consciousness and thinking, I'm going to die here. And I wondered if I would ever be, you know, found in this hotel we were staying. So I don't know. I survived. And I'm probably overdramatizing it. But it was just memorable. Because I often think back when I see people sick or whatever and think, gee, why the heck did I survive? That's not my PTSD thing, though, if you're wondering. What did you study at school? I studied film as an undergrad. Well, I started off in dance. And then I realized I wasn't really that talented. I mean, I was OK. But not really that good. So I moved over to film. And I really enjoyed that. And then later on in life, I went back to school and I became a lawyer. What do you do now? I'm an underemployed lawyer, I guess. I got tossed out with many people, you know. I now understand why the, what do you call it, the age discrimination laws kick in after I die. After 40. Well, you know. It's extremely difficult to get rehired. So now I have a couple of clients. I make a couple of pennies, you know. Would prefer to be fully employed. Not really going so well. That's why I'm here today to make my 35 measly bucks. Because after paying off all those loans and everything for law school because I had stupidly picked one of the more expensive law schools in the country. So any of you students listening, don't do that. I mean, don't pick an expensive grad school if you don't get financial aid and you don't have financial help from your family. So anyway, because I spent all my life paying off my undergrad and my graduate schools, I now find myself looking down the barrel of long-term unemployment and retirement and not having any, you know, any insurance or any enough for what they say we're supposed to live to in the future. What's your dream job? I don't even know anymore. I don't have any dreams left. When I was younger, my dream job was to be an ambassador because I thought it would just be so much fun to, you know, have contact with different countries and to get to be friendly and meet people all the time and to represent your country in a positive way. Yeah. I don't know. I don't think I have any dreams left. I'm too old. I have nothing that the world wants anymore. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Well, I was always extremely outgoing and friendly up until maybe, I don't know, five years ago. And then I guess I'm still friendly and outgoing. I just sort of have a little bit of a sense of purpose. sometimes I just give up and I don't even try anymore well it's embarrassing when people say what do you do to say you're unemployed because people think I've had so many people say well why don't you just go out and get a job well what are they assume that you're being lazy or something like that where it's like okay assholes I've worked since I was 12 you know I didn't have fun during college I worked three jobs to pay for it all and my loans I don't know I guess I just stopped trying because and I'm a little embarrassed about my situation you know I'm quote-unquote married to somebody who has this secret life I don't know what his story is I guess I'm embarrassed about my my life being you know pretty much a complete and utter failure of every every goal that I had tell me about your relationship with your family you I go for a bike ride along the lovely bike path I go swimming on occasion I will drink have a drink I have a low alcohol tolerance so basically one or two will pretty much have a drink I go for a bike ride I go swimming on occasion I will drink have a drink I go for a bike ride I go swimming along the road I controls this knows my flourishing and I have more connections to allивается propositions over in Chinaч both extremely physically and emotionally abusive. And I finally learned recently, you know, in the last maybe 10 years or so that that's the stuff that I accepted as normal was not normal. So I did all the assertiveness thing where you say, this is not, you know, please do not lie to me or whatever the thing they were doing. And, you know, the person's supposed to say, oh, I didn't know that was hurting you. Let me change. But of course, that never actually works in real life. So now I find that if I must have contact with these people, which I, one of them, I have to, I get extremely, you know, if they lie to me, I just get fed up and, you know, confront them on it. Well, well, can you give me a chance? I guess it was my hard time. Since I'm paying the cell phone bill and he's on the family plan, it turned out that he had 44 pages of texts while he's off on this secret trip to some summer camp. Don't ask. I don't, I don't even want to think about it. I don't know who these people are that he's texting with. So I asked him, what the F are you, these texts, who are you doing this with? And I tried calling some of the numbers and the people would just hang up on me. So, you know, my imagination, my imagination started thinking, what the hell is he doing at this summer camp? Why do the people that he's texting and texting photos to not respond? You know, draw your own conclusions. So, you know, and he wasn't answering me and he kept lying in these one sentence emails he was sending back. So I, you know, I started giving these threats in the emails back like, oh, yeah, well, if you don't tell me, I'm going to call up this number and find out who they were, which he wouldn't answer me. And then I, as I said, I called me. And they, they, they were just hanging up on me. So who knows who these people were. Well, I mean, there are the general life ones, like I wish I had never married this person. I, situation I wish I had handled differently. I guess I had a job. I actually was the head lawyer for a company. You probably won't believe it now, you guys who are out there watching this. And the president started doing all these things that were ethically wrong and going against my advice. And I should have gotten the Hades out of there. I should have quit immediately, but I was still paying off, you know, $200,000 worth of student loans. So, but I just should have gotten out of there. What's something you feel guilty about? Um, gee, willikers. Well, I guess the, the only real thing I feel guilty about is something I'd prefer not to discuss on tape. I mean, I've had enough shrinks tell me over the years that I, I was justified. What was the hardest decision you've ever had to make? Hardest decision I ever had to make? I don't know. I mean, every stupid, a lot of decisions have been difficult. The hardest one. I have no idea. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. The last 49 years. Um, I guess I could erase my big PTSD. When I was 18, a serial killer abducted me and I escaped from that. I, no, I haven't. How have you been feeling lately? I don't know. You know, it's been a long. Tell me more about that. Um, I just don't know. Just neither here nor there. I'm just numb anymore. I don't really care. I'm just waiting for, you know, to die. Have you ever ghosted in an entire workplace? Well, I kind of had a bad blow last week with something. Um, and I, I I just didn't have an appetite for likecapitalism or like, Beyblade gewoon particip doesn't work harblahopo. I don't know, five days. And the horrible thing is I didn't lose a single pound. I don't know. Can you tell me about that? Let's see. I didn't have hunger, so I didn't eat, and it didn't seem to affect my body at all. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Well, I seem to have developed some horrible neck pain, and that's made things doubly difficult. The second thing is that because I'm always plagued by these horrible nightmares, they're actually just actual events that have actually happened to me, just replaying over and over. I am an Internet addict, and I just put stuff on YouTube or whatever on all night long, and, you know, I frequent. I frequently have loud, loud sounds, so I don't sleep that well. And I have a horrible, horrible bed at the moment. I live in a very noisy place. Why do I live in a noisy place? Because I have been unemployed, as I told, or underemployed, as I told you, and I don't have money to live in a place that should be the equal of all the hard work I've done in my life. What are you listening to? You're looking at it. You know, like anybody would be. I don't feel that well. I'm tired. I don't know. Just tired. Yes, a couple people that I've met with have told me that I had it. The first time? I don't know. Maybe 15? The recurring nightmares, the, I don't know, I developed anxiety, and I freak out. You know, if I think I'm going to run out of gas, I get short of breath, and I don't know. I used to be able to handle anything. Now something stupid happens, and I catastrophize it and think that it's going to be horrific, so I have to talk myself out of it. Oh, I've lost all the B.L.A. ability to trust, and I'm numb to all feelings. Pardon me? Oh, well, I don't know what you said. Can you tell me about that? Well, you know, I think my PTSD, I was fine, and I had it. After the 18-year-old incident, I did fine and dandy, and then something happened in the last, like, decade. I just had hit after hit after hit. And it just brought everything back up. Or maybe it's because I'm not that busy anymore, so I have time to ruminate over all these horrible things. And it's a delayed thing. I'm way worse now than I was after the, you know, escaping from a serial killer. I mean, it's kind of a pain in the neck. Oh, literally. Literally. How do you cope with that? Well, if I'm not being healthy, I will, you know, drink a couple things of alcohol, which, I don't know, something's wrong with my heart, they told me. And so anymore, you know, even if I have just one, it causes a lot of pain and stuff. Or I try to do stuff to relax. Or, you know, if I'm having a really, really bad day, I might hit myself or hurt myself. In some other way. Because after you do that, it releases all, you know, you're all freaked out. And then if you hurt yourself, you get really distracted, like, oh, you know, this really hurts. And then you don't really think about the horrible thing that was in your head anymore. You're thinking about, I've got this pain. What got you? I don't know. I've tried to get help. I can't get any help now. I don't have any insurance. I can't. I'm not poor enough. I would need to go through all of my retirement savings and be penniless to get any free help. So, I mean, I'd like to be a normal person again. And I'd like to be happy. I'd like to be a functioning human, you know, like I used to be. No. I don't have the money. And nobody cares about, you know, lower middle income class people. I don't know. You know, I've been to a gazillion therapists. I'm not a gazillion, but, you know, I don't know, 15 therapists maybe over my 30 years or whatever it has been. Sometimes you get somebody that's good. And I found that the younger the person, the better, actually. When I was in law school, I went to see someone. Or when my father died when I was 18, right at the same time. and that other thing happened. I saw some students. They were actually the best ones. The worst ones seem to be the ones that are like in my age category or older because they've kind of checked out and they just want somebody who's there. But in terms of like, I don't know, I did that EMD, whatever thing it was called once and didn't really work. Sometimes you get a nougat. Like once some therapist said to me, you don't want to kill yourself. You just want a different life. So when I am suicidal, I just think of that sentence. I don't want to kill myself. I just want a different life. So sometimes you get a nougat, but generally it hasn't really saved me yet. Tell me more about that. Do I have to? I just did. Sometimes you get a good therapist. Oh, one thing I learned is that most therapists are actually more strong. Screwed up than me. You know, I may seem screwed up to you guys here, but you know, at least I, I used to be able to function. I was somewhat successful and I, I've never intentionally hurt people. I don't screw people over. I'm not dishonest in my work. I'm compassionate. And I've found so many therapists, you know, they live their little teeny lives in suburbia or wherever the heck they're from. And they're totally incapable of relating to anything that's outside of their own. And I think that's a really good thing. I think that's a really good thing. I think that's a really good thing. I think that's a really good thing. I think that's a really good thing. their world. Well, I haven't been, as I told you. So when I did go, I noticed that it was fun to go somewhere once a week and have somebody listen to your tales of woe. Although sometimes it got frustrating if the person was not helpful. really happy um i've been trying to cultivate it so last night i was on the bike path and i looked around at the beautiful naturey things and there were briefs literally seconds where i had it and then you know some aggressive bike rider or somebody else would come along and that would be destroyed but otherwise more than perhaps a brief second or a couple of seconds i don't even know i don't even know oh oh i it is good oh my god are you even listening i don't think you're listening very carefully you're like some of the shrinks i've had um people is that what you wanted me to tell you about i don't even know what the question was anymore to tell you the truth sorry so oh no it's just the empty silence that i've been having i'm supposed to be filling to answer for you uh what was the question i don't know sometimes therapy is helpful sometimes it's not oh the happiness that was the question sometimes uh i've had happy my happiest moment was when i climbed up inside the great pyramid of giza that was an extremely i don't know it's just a wonderful wonderful feeling i'm claustrophobic i was proud that i made it through there and it was just an amazing sight gosh is this a test to see how one reacts when there's an uncomfortable silence how should one react to Buddha down in life i'm told about my ownходит today it should be wild you're still in Africa you barely Mean сим All right. She did stop talking. I thought it was a test of how one reacts during an uncomfortable silence. I thought it was a test of how one reacts during an uncomfortable silence.