Okay. Okay. Okay. All right. I think I got it. Okay. Okay, like that. Okay. Okay. I'm going to start the recording now. Okay. So, yeah, she's just going to ask you to say your goodbyes. And then when she's done, she should say goodbye. But if for any reason she stops for more than 10 to 15 seconds, something may go wrong, and you can hit the button. If not, when she says goodbye. And right now, if she can't answer any questions, she can only ask you to say goodbye. I'm going to start. Hi, I'm Ellie. I'm a student from New York. I just created a talk show before in school, and I'm just here in my room. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people, and if you want to learn about me, I'll ask you a few questions before I start. And please feel free to come to me. Your answers are very confidential. Are you a therapist? Yes. Okay. Okay. So, how are you doing today? Fine. That's good. Where are you from originally? San Francisco. All right. What are some things you really like about LA? Hmm. I like the way it's organized. The beaches, fire pits, the ocean, movies, entertainment business, the different areas, the weather. What are some things you really like about LA? It's really difficult to get around by bus. It's terrible not having a car. That's the biggest thing. The hardest part, you can't really do LA without a car in every way. Do you have a car? By bus, I do. What's one of your most memorable experiences? My most memorable experiences. Did you study at school? Oh. What did I study at school? I studied... I'm studying acting right now is what I'm doing. What do you do now? I'm studying acting and I'm working a day job that doesn't pay enough money. So, I'm trying to find additional day jobs or I don't know how to... I'm trying to figure out how to live with joy. That's how to live with joy. That's when your life flows is when you... do more of what brings you joy. That's my current dilemma. What's your dream job? I think my dream job would be weighing 70 pounds less and being a really emotionally diverse actress so I could play comedy roles which is easier for me and heavy drama roles which is more of a challenge to be vulnerable and to open up emotionally. So, that's kind of what I'm studying right now and I would look a thousand percent better because my hair would be long. Tell me about your relationship with your family. I'm a family man. I really am thinking I don't have a family anymore. My father passed away and there's no relationship with my sister and a very poor one with my mother. So, it's almost like not having any family anymore. Sometimes when I'm feeling down, I turn on the fish tank screen saver. Hey, I know it's not the line but it's the best-aid guide. What do you do in your life? Take a shower. How are you at controlling your temper? Pretty good. When was the last time you argued with your family? When was it last? I guess it was a couple months ago. And... It was a friend that kind of flipped out on me. Tell me about a situation that you wish you had handled differently. That would be the situation I wish I did handle it differently. What's something you feel crazy about? Infidelity. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. That's a good question. The hardest decision I've ever had to make... Well, I had an amazing cat and if you can imagine it was more than a cat. It was like a being, a very large entity in the body of a cat. And my cat passed away and I had to... I wanted to have a proper burial at an animal cemetery and have a memorial service for my cat. And my mother was against these ideas. That was too much for a cat. And so it took me two and a half months to come up with the money to find his casket. And to decide on what style of casket I wanted. Because it was so hard to own that decision when I didn't get any support over it. But eventually I triumphed and I found an artisan in Tennessee that makes cedar chests. And he made me the most beautiful cedar casket octagonal. Octagonal with ivory lining and plush padding on the inside of the casket. And the people at the animal cemetery said that in 20 years of business they'd never seen such a beautiful casket. And they'd never seen someone that gave so much to their animal. So I felt really, really good when I saw the way that I was sort of like sending my cat into the cemetery. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Oh, an event I could erase from my memory. I think my favorite is the one I did in the past. I think I have erased a lot of events from my memory. Well, I've probably had a lot of them. Weird experiences. Definitely. Have you ever served in the military? No. How have you been doing lately? Well, you know, I'm a very determined human being. So I'm very determined. So I work myself into being in positive states of mind. But overall, I think that I'm definitely realizing I have some deep depression. And essentially, I just need more of a support network here in LA. I need to create a new family. And that's basically what I need to, you know, really do. Which is difficult because it's hard to have a family and family and friends. You know, people that you can really, really trust. And it's just hard to get around LA without a car. So I feel a lack of support in my life. And I feel isolated and lonely. Other than that, I'm very optimistic. Any changes? Yeah, I walk to work, which is in Beverly Hills. And I walk through Beverly Hills. And I noticed that even though I'm walking around nice places, I'm joyless when I'm walking to work. It doesn't really make me that happy. It makes me happier when I get to the commercial part. And there's more people around. And there's lots of kind of like activity and shops. It does nothing for me like walking through the neighborhoods, I noticed. I noticed that I have a lot of lethargy in my body, which is depression. How easy is it for you to get to sleep? I'm really working hard at going to sleep before midnight. And I noticed that it makes it bigger. And I notice that it makes a difference when I do get enough sleep. What are you like when you're not sleeping? I'm fine. I'm just tired. But I think I'm, you know, pretty fine energy-wise in terms of interacting with other people. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with any other symptoms? Yes. How long ago were you diagnosed? Recently. What were your symptoms? Lethargy, lack of joy, lack of community, lack of close bonds, lack of support network. No one to talk to. Not a lot of energy to do extra things that would, you know, help make your life better. It's just sort of get into the struggle of just getting through the day. And then trying to find the energy to do something to make it better. Are you triggered by something? Yeah, I think I know what my overall trigger, what the overall thing is, but it's deeper than the overall thing itself. If that makes any sense. Well. I. Um. You guys are going to think I'm a complete whack job, but honestly, I'm really not. I, um, I called my mother yesterday and I left her a message. And at the end of the message, I said, I love you. Um, and, uh, that's a month since she called me, which was my birthday when she called me. I didn't answer, but she didn't say she loved me. The year before that, she didn't even call me on my birthday. And, um, she said she wasn't feeling well. And, uh, we had a falling out in November, so I haven't spoken to her since the following out. But essentially what I realized in November was just a tremendous amount of inability to love that she has towards me. And I think it's a lifelong thing. So I think it's hard for me to get close to people. And to bond with people. Because if you can't trust your mother, who can you trust? And if you haven't received love from your mother, and you don't know really how to receive love, actually. Something about receiving love or receiving self-worth or validation or something like that. Um. I think that lack of support, you know, throughout my whole life. Regardless of how ambitious or determined I am. There's an underpinning, really, every day, you know, of sadness about that. Not having a mother. Um. And so that's, I think, the main challenge to work out in my psyche or soul or emotions. Something like that. How do you cope with them? How do I cope with my emotions? Well, I sit with them alone, mainly. Since there's no one to share the deeper ones with that would really understand me. There's no long-term relationships. But I do interact with my emotions a lot when I'm training my instrument in acting class. And so. That's a big, you know, workout emotionally. What got you into the club? Um. A couple months ago, I went through a patch where I didn't have a place to stay. And ended up staying with someone that I thought was a student friend. Um. She turned out to be crazy. And, um, I had to leave there. And as a result, um, I had to seek counseling, per the mandate of my school. That's the incident that triggered it. Do you still go to the acting class? Yes. Okay. Do you feel safe within the school? I feel comfortable in the classroom. Therapy is useful. It's a reflective experience. So you're reflective throughout the week before you see your therapist. And then you sort of start thinking on a deeper level about a theme, a current theme that's like what's really the issue. And then it feels very look forward to having someone to talk to that can really listen. So the gift of active listening. And then feeling a satisfaction from another human being caring about you, your welfare. And having someone to talk to on a deeper level. When I was in my acting class, which was, well, I took some classes. I audited some classes last week. And at those moments, a lot of joy. And when I was at my school studying, which was like two and a half months ago. And then I was like, I'm going to do this. And I was like, I'm going to do this. And I was like, I'm going to do this. Who's been a positive influence in my life? That would be the most positive influence was my cat, Benjamin, and my former partner. And no best friends at the moment. And I'm glad I was able to find her again. And I was Heart of the Father bed for me because I was just being myself. I went to UCB and saw improv. One of the most proud of Seamus. Are you proud of Seamus that much. I guess. Yeah. Yeah. Well, okay. She was good at stressful jobs. Uh, yeah. my cat and I'm most proud of that I have been making a lot of progress you know working on career stuff and I have a positive attitude even though it's very difficult growing up with the family that doesn't give you the kind of emotional or financial support so I've grown up with a lot of jealousy and negativity and lack of support you're welcome goodbye you I'll take you there