Okay. So we can just kind of sit here waiting. Another thing is that she is not quite capable yet of answering your questions, so she'll be the one asking the questions in this case. So a lot of people feel like asking her questions, but she's not ready to respond just yet. Okay. So I'm just going to answer whatever she says, and then she'll lead everything. So she's going to ask you some questions, and then when she's done, you're going to press, she's going to say goodbye, and then you're going to press this button to let me know you guys are done. Okay. I'm going to go ahead and start the recording. Okay. Okay. Hi. I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Okay. Yes. I'm doing good. Brooklyn, New York. The sun, the weather. A lot of the people. The beach. The beach. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? I see what you mean. Some of the people. Do you travel a lot? I like to, whenever I can. I'm a big fan of traveling. What do you enjoy about traveling? Visiting new places, meeting other people. Eating different foods. Seeing other cultures. That kind of stuff. I'd like to hear about one of your trips. I went to Spain recently. And that's a little bit of a more laid back lifestyle. They don't work the same amount of hours as Americans. Different culture. They take a lot of breaks, rests during the middle of the day. Especially in the summer when it's really hot. Totally different food style, culture. They go out to bars and restaurants a lot later. Stays open later. And it's just something new. It's exciting. And I look forward to seeing other types of destinations like that. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Going to Spain with all my old high school friends. I hadn't seen them in a while. And we did a big tour of Spain. We went to Madrid, Barcelona. Valencia. Had a great time. I spent a couple of weeks out there I got to relax and have fun. What did you study at school? I was a computer science major. What do you do now? I do I.T consulting. OK. So if I stop. What's your dream job? Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? What's your relationship with your family? Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the Fishtip screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? I usually watch a movie or go to the movies. I go to the park. I have a small dog, so I like taking him around the block. That usually relaxes me a bit. How are you at controlling your temper? I'm usually pretty good. I don't really get extremely angry very often. I keep a lot of my emotions inside, which isn't always good. But I don't really get angry. I never have crazy angry outbursts and get violent or anything like that. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? The last time I argued with someone was a few weeks ago. We were actually in Las Vegas. We were with a big group of people and we were just trying to decide where to go. One of my friends was pretty adamant about one place. She said it was unappealing to the rest of the group. It got a little confrontational, but everything worked out in the end. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. I think the passing of my mom's dad. I wish I would have been a little more loving and emotional to my mom about it. It was a very difficult time for her. I should have been there a little bit more than I was. What's something you feel guilty about? I feel guilty about just not being as loving and caring to my parents. They've done a lot for me and provided a lot. I don't always really show my appreciation to them as much as I wish I should. I'm not a very good person. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. The hardest decision I've ever... Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Something that I wish was erased would certainly be when I was pulled over for a date. It was a very embarrassing moment, but I wish that had never happened. Do you have any memories of how you have been feeling? Have you ever served in the military? No. How have you been feeling lately? I've been a little bit sad. I had another death in the family recently. My uncle passed away a couple weeks ago. It's been a little bit difficult on all of us. We're all spread out around the country, so it's tough. We can't really be together in person. It makes it difficult. I'm sorry to hear that. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thought for you? Just recently. I think I've been a little more bummed out and down a little bit more than normal. I'm sure it'll turn around soon, but some of these things just take time to heal. Tell me more about that. Whenever you lose someone close to you in a family, it's very difficult for everyone. Different people show their emotions differently. For me, I tend to keep a lot of it in. It'd be a little more beneficial if I was able to express it to someone more, but I don't really feel comfortable doing that all the time. Hopefully things get better. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? It's very difficult because I work a lot of strange hours too. I'm up working late. I've got to get up early and sometimes I can sleep in more. If I'm not in a set routine, it makes it a little more difficult. I usually get a decent amount of sleep as often as possible. I usually don't have too much trouble in that sense. What are you like when you don't sleep well? If I don't sleep well, I'm usually a little bit more irritable, more grumpy. Smaller things can set me off. I have certain techniques to relax a little bit more. Whenever that happens, I'm usually able to handle myself appropriately. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Alright. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. When was the last time you felt really happy? The last time was probably about three weeks ago when I was in Las Vegas visiting some friends and had some other friends come out to visit that I hadn't seen in a while. That was a fun happy time for the weekend. I'm happy to be able to go out and do things. That's good. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? My dad has always been a good role model to me. Professional and always been there regardless of what I've been going through. I certainly look up to him and appreciate everything he's done for me. How would your best friend describe you? He would describe me as being pretty social, outgoing, but a little bit more shy and reserved. Friendly, caring, honest, and reliable. That's great. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Something that I recently did that I enjoyed was... Completing a big project for someone. I built a large website that had been a big project for a while and it's been taking up a lot of my time. Finally getting that finished and taken care of was a big relief and a weight off my shoulders. Nice. What are you most proud of in your life? Most proud of my family. They've always been there for me. I've gone through a lot of tough times when I was younger and they've always been there to support me and that's really meant a lot. That's really kept me going. I've got great friends around me as well, but family first. They've always been there when I've needed them. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thank you. Goodbye. Goodbye. Bye.