Takk for ating med. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Yes. I'm doing good. Where are you from originally? Long Beach, California. Alright. What are some things you really like about LA? I don't really like anything about LA. What are some things you don't really like about LA? The traffic. I don't like... I see what you mean. A lot of the people. And I don't... Do you travel a lot? Yes, I travel often. What do you enjoy about traveling? I like seeing new places and eating different foods. I'd like to hear about one of your trips. I went snowboarding in Canada. I went to Whistler. And I had a really fun time snowboarding and hanging out with my friends in a cabin. I got to see snow. What's one of your most memorable experiences? I don't know. What comes to your mind? What did you study at school? I studied communications. What do you do now? Right now, I'm still a student. And I go to school and work part-time. What's your dream job? My dream job would be a political publicist. Do you consider yourself a political publicist? I wish I could be a political publicist. Do you feel more shy or outgoing? In the middle. Tell me about your relationship with your family. I have a pretty good relationship with my family. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the Fishtank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? I like to watch TV to relax and drink. Not the best, but I'm getting better at it. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. Whatever comes to your mind. I don't think I did that well because I was nervous. I wish I wasn't so nervous all the time. What's something you feel guilty about? I feel guilty about the things that I have to do to get ahead of other people sometimes. My heart is Tell me about the hardest decision that you've ever The hardest decision I've ever had to make was to go into the military. Feel arises Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. I was in a really bad relationship and I wish I could forget it because I think it causes a lot of problems for me because I always remember it. Have you ever served in the military? Yes, I have served in the military. How old were you when you joined the military? I joined the military when I was 22. Why did you decide to join the military? Because I was broke and I needed money for school. Are you happy you did that? Yes. Did you ever see combat? Yes. How easy was it for you to go back to civilian life? It wasn't easy. It was really hard. Why? Because I didn't have any options when I got out of the military. What did you do after the military? I went to school. I enrolled in college. Uh huh. How did serving in the military change you? I became more disciplined. Nicer. How have you been feeling lately? I'm not the best. I'm always nervous and depressed and not happy. Yes. Can you tell me about that? I've been more jumpy and anxious and nervous. I fidget a lot. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? I usually have to have some sort of liquor in order to really get to sleep. It's all pretty hard, I guess. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Like a zombie. Groggy. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. I haven't. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. When was the last time you felt really happy? A long time ago. Tell me more about that. My sister had a baby and it just was really happy for me and my family. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? My mom has been a positive influence. Tell me more about that. Well, she's just always really nice and considerate and upbeat and just a positive person. How would your best friend describe you? Outgoing, funny, a little bit foolish. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. I took a trip to Philadelphia to visit my best friend and I had a really fun time. Nice. I'm glad you're happy. What are you most proud of in your life? My family. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Goodbye. Bye. Thank you mem. I really appreciate this trip. Thanks everyone. It's late at night and the haltens cool and Erick 에 muitas schön. Okay, what will you call me? Yo i'm a consultant for eternal annyeong, sarangham hasa barbeque ke akabang ב reservationary. Takk. Tackk.