But when you deal with humans, you've got to deal with feelings and emotions. Not with this, though. All right. All right. Hi, Ellie. Yes, I am. Okay. So, how are you doing today? Outstanding. Where are you from originally? Syracuse, New York. What are some things you really like about LA? Whether the... What are some things you don't really like about LA? Traffic and crime. Do you travel a lot? No. Why? Well, I did most of my traveling in the military, so I've been around the world twice already, so I've seen all I need to see. What's one of your most memorable experiences? Hiroshima Memorial. In Hiroshima, Japan. Seeing people that survived the bomb attack that had disfigured parts of their body. It was etched in my brain forever. What did you study at school? In the military, aviation ordinance. What do you do now? I'm a disabled veteran and waiting on a pension. And whatever I can do to make money, legally. What's your dream job? Caddying for Tiger Woods. Do you consider yourself more shy or a little more open? Outgoing. Outgoing. But I am shy in some areas. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Almost non-existent. But there is communication. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank screen saver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? Walk. Walked down North Broadway in East Los Angeles. How long do you live in California? Pretty good. I've been known to fly off the handle, but the older I get, the less I do it. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? Maybe about a week ago, and it was over internet usage. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. Jumping to conclusions on certain things with my girlfriend. Sometimes I struggle with mental health issues due to the military. And sometimes I say the wrong thing or I make false accusations and assume things. But I'm not afraid of that. I never let it get too far. What's something you feel close to about? A lot of things that I've said that I didn't really mean to say. Probably from being paranoid about things. And... Mm-hmm. Yeah. I don't know. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Whether... Where I was going to live after I was discharged from the military. Mm-hmm. Have you ever served in the military? Yes. How old were you when you were discharged? 18. How did you decide to join the military? My brother was a sergeant major active in the military. And my parents had both deceased. And I basically had nowhere to go upon graduation from high school. Grew up fast. I see. So, what's the hardest thing you've ever done? I got out. Are you happy with it though? Yes. It's sad I got out. I should have stayed in 20 years. All right. Did you ever see combat? I was in a combat situation twice. I was in the United States Marine Corps. And I was activated for an attack on Libya and it never transpired. President Reagan canceled it. and I was also recalled for the Gulf War to work on the 20mm guns and I was on an LPH, a naval vessel, fairly close to the combats in the Middle East and the Persian Gulf. All right. How easy was it for you to go back to civilian life? Pretty easy at first. I was an angry man when I made the adjustment, but I had a heavy drinking problem. It was an experience, a traumatic one at that, but I pulled through. Not all that bad. What did you do after the military? I worked for some biomedical corporations and software manufacturing companies as shipping and receiving, inventory analyst, material handler, stuff like that. I also worked part-time as a security guard and a lot of different things. Okay. How did serving in the military change you? It gave me discipline, gave me some good qualities like punctuality and attention to detail and fear no one, fear no man. Okay. How have you been feeling lately? Good lately, but I struggle with mental health issues like ADHD, depression, PTSD. I've been feeling a little bit more positive. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior and your confidence? They've been more positive, a little bit more positive. I'm not, it's pretty hard, pretty hard. I take some Schedule II narcotics, amphetamines for the ADHD, so that doesn't help. And I basically, I don't, I pass out more than I fall asleep. What are you like when you don't sleep well? I've learned to deal with it okay. I'm not grouchy or irritable. I just, if I don't have anything nice to say, I don't say anything at all. But there was times when I was a little edgy. How old are you? Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? Yes, one time. How long ago were you diagnosed? Ten years ago. Ten years maybe. What were your symptoms? Heavy dream activity. Reliving, reliving my life. Reliving experiences that were in the past. Not being able to fall back asleep. Fits of rage, unconscious fits of rage and stuff like that. Are you triggered by something? Um, combat training in the Marine Corps. And, and, and. Actual, uh, almost entering a situation like that is pretty traumatic. Even though you don't enter the situation, the training up to that point is, is safe. And then all of a sudden you have to use what you were trained in a safe environment and take it into an unsafe environment is, is pretty traumatic. Fear of the unknown. How do you cope with that? Um, it's not so much anymore. I, time heals everything. I'm a firm believer of that. And then, um, I've, I actually had a, a dream just recently about, about it. And it's been the first one I've had in maybe a year or two. So, it's subsiding slowly. Okay. What taught you to be healthy? Um, the VA. When, when I, when I first went to get primary care and, and, um, they looked at my file and thought maybe I should be examined. Oh, thank you. Do you still go to therapy now? No, I don't. Not, not for PTSD, no. I was going to some classes briefly. Why did you stop? Um, it wasn't, it wasn't really an issue with me anymore. Um, I'm coping with it well and, and it's, like I said, time heals everything. I'm, I do believe that. And it's, the, the nightmares are few and far between now and I'm comfortable without it. One year fall. Can you feel therapy in this fall? Yes. I'm feeling it. I'm feeling it. So, the most important thing is if your, if your heart's in it. Can you tell me about that? Well if you, if you're forced to do something, you're not really going to put your heart into it but if you really want to seek help and you really want, really want something, you'll try to get it from in your heart. What sort of changes have you noticed in the form of therapy? Um. Yes. I'm more, I eat better, I take care of my physical and mental health needs better, and I don't avoid doctors or hospitals anymore. I go and get help. When was the last time you felt really happy? Today. Can you tell me about that? Well, I've been in a relationship now for about six months. I'm 50 years old and she's 23, and it makes me young again, kind of. I've got a good woman by my side now. I was alone for many years. I'm not alone. I'm not alone. I'm not alone. So it's a good feeling. Who is someone that's been a positive influence in your life? Social workers and doctors at the VA that treat you with respect and genuinely try to help you. What is your biggest challenge? Char unterwegs during times of adversity. How do your best friends distract you from really being faced with hardships in their Someone who never let them down. How do you plan to replace those whom you really love? Some of my friends are Channel come on. It was just amazing. It felt great being honest with President Obama. It was such a human experience that felt great to hear. If a potential family member wishes to tell you who they are, that person is there for They serve a value to your life from whatever connection that they may have with your family. What are you most proud of in your life? Serving my country and getting honorable discharge. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. My pleasure, Ellie. Bye. Bye. I think Ellie was impressed.