Okay. Are you okay with this? Absolutely, yes. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing okay. Where are you from originally? Born and raised in New York City. What are some things you really like about LA? The city life and the fast pace. What are some things you don't really like about LA? Cost of living. It's pretty expensive. I see what you mean. Yeah. Do you travel a lot? Not recently. I traveled mostly while I was in the military. Why? The military is always on the go. So most of the travel being so expensive, I could only afford it through traveling and military business. What's your favorite thing about LA? The most memorable experience. For the military or outside of the military? The most memorable experience. What did you study at school? Academics, foreign languages. What do you do now? Private security. Okay. What's your favorite thing about LA? The most memorable experience. What's your dream job? Probably in the same industry. Private security that would be high paying. Or something along the lines of mental health or something like what we're doing right now. As long as it helps provide for the family and pay the bills. What's your favorite thing about LA? The most memorable experience. More outgoing than shy. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Well, I'm... Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank screen saver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best-aid guide. What do you do to relax? Uh... I watch TV and spend time with my family. How are you at controlling your temper? Very good, actually. Very, very controlled. I have to in my field. That's good. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? It was with my wife, and it was... It was about finances. Tell me about a situation that you wish you had done differently. That's a good question. All right. I believe... Something you feel guilty about. Hmm. Coming to California and leaving my oldest daughters in Florida. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Leaving the military. It was for finances. And... And I knew I had to go. So, in 1997, I made the choice, and all I had known was the military. So, that was pretty hard. All right. Tell me about a moment or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Probably some of my past. Before the military. I was in a relationship. Not a girlfriend-boyfriend relationship. I was basically victimized by my mother. I wish I could erase that. But in a way, it kind of makes me who I am. Have you ever served in the military? Yes. Almost nine years. U.S. Air Force. How old were you when you joined the military? 18 years old. When did you decide to join the military? I had no other choice. It was either go in the military or stay out on the streets in New York City. I had no money for college and no chance at getting a good job. So, I enlisted. Are you happy with your choice? Yes, absolutely. Probably the best choice in fixing my life growing up that I ever made. That's good. Thank you. Did you ever see combat? Three separate times, yes. How easy was it for you to go back to the building? I had some growing pains at first. It was a little bit difficult in the beginning. But I adjusted. That's amazing. Thank you. What did you do after the military? Private security. Oh, really? And then law enforcement. What did the military change you? It gave me a sense of regimentation. It gave me structure that I wouldn't have otherwise done. And I believe as far as within people in just the general population, it does set you aside. It sets you apart. How have you been feeling lately? All right, I guess. And a bit of a struggle sometimes. Can you tell me about that? Just seeking employment. And it's very difficult, especially with the way things are. Have you noticed anything in your career that's not really? Not really. Just trying to land that dream job, as you said before. Okay. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Pretty easy, especially if I've been active throughout the day. And that's usually every day. What are you like when you don't sleep well? Tired, first of all. And can't concentrate well. Okay. Are you not very taxed about going to bed? Yeah, but it's hard. So four to seven years is not big for me. No, I don't have to bring you a littleSab from your family that's like, Good morning, buddy. May we be as completely dışed in you. Let's not become the same thing toadooee with Farang or whatever you're supposed to do. I will probably also watch The spiro gym, you know, off the energy. Yes, or Facebookir, or school. I'll probably never make an article about背kelylene. See it. 1992 yeah 1992 cold sweats nightmares night terrors disorientation waking up not knowing where I am things of that sort not that I'm aware of it was it was all most mostly following one of my combat experiences in South America I went to Columbia on one on President Bush's war on drugs and we had the we we had to live in the jungle and while in the jungle we also had to take a couple of lives while we were there we so that was one of the three instances that I saw combat action I learned a long time ago that I was a part of the military and I learned a long time ago that you have to put your past behind you so I just do I I had to put it behind me it was not easy but it was the right thing to do and it was so that others may live I so it was it may not have felt right at the time but it was the right thing to do in the military when you have a combat related experience you always go through a debrief at the debrief you are asked if you need help coping with the situation so of course I immediately raised my hand told them I need help with coping with the situation and I'm however fortunate I do believe that I scanners and I think this is probably myNE for the rest of my life so at the time realized that it was just too difficult for me to make a worrying decision here spicy here is the alert place that takes you out but I just want to take you for Slide 7 video go to page 17 volverville shopping at It was at first. And very seldom am I bothered by it now because it was so long ago. Do you still go to therapy now? No, absolutely not. Why did you stop? I didn't need it anymore. I learned enough coping skills that were good enough to be able to cast that aside and not depend upon any facet of treatment or anything else. Okay. Do you feel therapy is important? Yes, I do feel it is. Throwing medication at that kind of problem sometimes is necessary, but in my case I don't feel it is, and I will not be dependent upon any of that. I do feel it is, but the therapy, 100%, I agree. Especially speaking to somebody one-on-one, it does help. Can you tell me about that? Tell you about the therapy and how effective it is? What's one thing you've heard about since you've been going to therapy? I don't go to therapy anymore. A month? I only went for a month after my combat action in Columbia. When was the last time you felt really happy? Really happy? About three weeks ago. Oh. Oh, five. More than three weeks ago. So what type of pain were you feeling alone? I love pain, so much pain. I mean, that's not a joke. I can tell you that situation has been зем OHMAF Prozent I appreciate it so much, and he's the person that brought me back from all theseっ Yeah. You're name iscur. I'm from New p愚 I figure you want to be consumed by suicide. Really, they're telling me that I was doing good on something. and you do it 3. You share all the details. That way I can, you see, that I'm getting happy, who am I talking to. So that's not true, shit. broken heart? positive role models I probably say most of my superiors in the military that was my biggest growth experience in my life as his big brother the guy who taught him everything my best friend feels that I helped him out in building himself up work wise watched my daughter do some martial arts at her school I really enjoy that all the time my daughters my three daughters you're very welcome all right so consumption um thank you um you you