How many times a year can you do these studies? This one in particular, some of our studies you can only participate in them once, but if it's an unrelated study you can do this. Call me every day, especially during the summer. Yeah, we have the one that you just did and this one are the ones that we have going on right now, but if there's other ones that come up that's really good to know. We'd love to have you, especially right around the corner. Yeah, I have a friend in the other corner and she'd love this too. Oh, perfect. Okay, tell her to sign up. I will. I don't know how many spots are available, but you can let her know. Thank you. Okay, so I'm going to start all the recordings now. Yeah, because I still haven't done the negotiations, so I'm game for that. Oh, right. I wonder if I can reschedule one. Can I reschedule one? Yeah. All right. I'll ask if you can reschedule one. Even right after this? We don't have a spot available right after this because we do, there's like female study and then a male study, so we don't have anything right after this, but if there's a cancellation, since you're right around the corner, we can reschedule. Okay. So, I'm going to call you. Yeah, game. Okay, great. Okay, so now I'm going to start her up. And press that button when she says, okay. Okay. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I'm just cool when I talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions at the start and please feel free to tell me anything. You're in a good place. Yes. How are you? Good, thank you. I'm good. Where are you from originally? Los Angeles. Okay, thank you. What are some things you really like about LA? Ocean, breeze, families here. What are some things you don't really like about LA? Obviously the traffic and the sprawlingness of it all. I see what you mean. Do you travel a lot? Not really, somewhat. Why? To see new places, explore, have adventures. What's one of your most memorable experiences? In what area? I don't know what you mean. I don't have a specific. What did you study at school? Business and then education. What do you do now? Teach. What's your dream job? Being a detective. What's your dream job? Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Half and half. Tell me about your relationship with your family. It's very close. My six brothers and sisters are my best friends. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? I read, I solve puzzles, I go for a walk, I eat. How are you at controlling your temper? Excellent. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? Probably my boss, maybe two or three months ago. It was about the fact that he's inexperienced and arrogant and we have to deal with that. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. What happens to your mind? I wish I had lent someone some money once. What's your dream job? I want to be a doctor. What's something you feel guilty about? I could have been kinder to my parents. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. All right. Probably when I was... Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. My mother traveling around. I wish I had shooter, I wish I was pistol honest. Tell me about the past that came up. Well maybe being honest to yourself and five other things. That my purpose doesn't help, I'm going to pronounce it a little specific. The things I miss from a scary topic are Commitment,yearning,anticipating and this. Help? Are you happy with your life? Probably, yes. Maybe not, I don't know. I never think about it. Did you ever see combat? No. All right. How easy was it for you to go back to civilian life? Pretty easy. What did you do after the military? Went back to school. All right. How did serving in the military change you? It lowered my standards of life a little bit. Okay. It cheapened me. It was more low class than I had ever experienced. How have you been feeling lately? Pretty good. Can you tell me about that? Well, I'm off work. I'm just relaxing but still staying productive, so life's pretty good. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? No. Maybe a little less social than usual, but that's about it. How easy was it for you to get a good night's sleep? Not that easily do I stay asleep. I have sleep apnea. What are you like when you don't sleep? Um, maybe a little less energy. Probably a little grumpier. All right. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. Mm-hmm. When was the last time you felt really happy? Maybe a couple days ago. Can you tell me about that? Well, I did a nice thing for my brother and his kids. I made a trip out to his place so that he could have a little vacation time with his kids. So then I was really happy I did that, even though I dreaded doing it. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? Probably my mom. Tell me more about that. Well, she's a little bit, oops, more of a better version of myself. She exercises more. She's a little smarter, a little kinder perhaps. Good inspirational person. How would your best friend describe you? Kind, smart. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Right now I'm reading a book I enjoyed. I did the puzzle this morning in the paper that I enjoyed. Went to the gym. I enjoyed having done it. Saw a movie I enjoyed. Nice. What are you most proud of in your life? That I have very, very rarely been purposely unkind to someone. Okay. I think I've answered that one. You've lost everything on YouTube. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Goodbye. Bye. Hi. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay.