We got that. Okay, so once again, once she's done, she'll say goodbye, and then you're gonna press the button. All right. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in the same kind of care environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions, get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? I'm sorry. I'm just trying to get a little bit of a sense of what you're doing. Okay. So, how are you doing today? Fine. That's good. Where are you from originally? Washington, D.C. What are some things you really like about L.A.? Weather. I'm a little bit of a person. The food and the people. What are some things you don't really like about L.A.? Traffic. I see what you mean. Do you travel a lot? Yes, I do. What do you enjoy about traveling? Learning about people. different cultures. I just recently went to the United Kingdom for a wedding two years ago, or last year. Probably, I don't know. I don't know. I have a lot. Computer information systems. What do you do now? Now I coach children in basketball. What's your dream job? I'm doing my dream job. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? Outgoing. Tell me about your relationship with your mom. I have a very close relationship with my family. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? I go swimming. How are you at controlling your comfort? I'm very comfortable. Very well. Very good at controlling myself. When was the last time you argued with someone and what was it about? It was this morning and it was about business. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. What was the most surprising thing? Um, situation with my ex-girlfriend. What's something you feel guilty about? Um, what I had to do when I was in the Marine Corps. What did you do to help her? What did you do to help her? I helped her with the school. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Um, the hardest decision I ever had to make was when I was active duty in the Marine Corps. Just deciding if I wanted to put my life in danger to save the lives of other people. And I had about a second to decide. All right. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Um, my trip to combat in Kosovo. Have you ever served in the military? Yes. All right. How have you been in the military? Fine. Tell me more about that. About me feeling fine? Um, I don't know what more to tell you. I feel good. Have you ever seen any changes in your behavior or self-esteem? No. Okay. What are you most proud of? Um, my thoughts have been consistent. There are no changes. What's the best thing that you've done to get a good night's sleep? How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? Um, it's not that easy. What are you like when you don't sleep well? This, restless. What's the best thing that you've done for yourself? Um, I think that I'm the best person in the world. I'm not. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Alright. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. When was the last time you felt really happy? About an hour ago. Tell me more about that. I play basketball every day and I was playing this morning before I came here and just the peak of my happiness is while I'm playing. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? My father. Your father? Can you tell me about that? He's just been a guiding force. How do your best friends grab you? Determined. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. I made a filet mignon steak on the George Foreman grill last night and I loved it. Nice. What are you most proud of in your life? My ability to help people. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Absolutely. Goodbye. Goodbye. Okay, you all are getting agesetzt. The guy in afro and Bolivian. You don't care about wealth. I'll às vestir. Here you go. We don't have any минут comments, so just . . .son Crew capable of taking our moments turn over them to people's wits. Yeah.