Okay. She's levitating there. All right, there she is. Okay. Okay, great. So now I'm going to make sure the picture is over here. Put your left foot to the button. All right. So again, when she says goodbye, just let me know. All right, thank you. Hi. Hi, Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I'm just trying to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people, and I'd love to learn about you. I'll ask you a few questions when I start it. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Sure. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing well, thank you. That's good. Where are you from originally? I'm from Columbia, South Carolina. Uh-huh. What are some things you really like about LA? For me, the weather, the people, and just a nice place to live. What are some things you don't really like about LA? Traffic. I see what you mean. Do you travel a lot? Not really. What do you enjoy about traveling? Just the adventure of going to new places and just getting away from Los Angeles and just going to new places. I love being in the Bay Area. There's no curfew there. But I do enjoy going to other places a lot. It ought to get me to have a chance to see good old LA, so that I have some um there's a lot of stuff to read on here. And Katrina a study impression of the Baltimore area. Let me just take a quick Thorough been excited to meet my relatives from Mesquite road, to practice America. What's one of your most memorable experiences? What did you study at school? What do you do now? I work with computers. What's your dream job? Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? I'm pretty much outgoing. Why? That's just who I am. Tell me about your relationship with your family. I have a very strong relationship with my family. My mom passed away a couple of years back, so we're extra close. Close with all my brothers, my siblings, sisters, and with my father. So, very close family. And I miss them right now. They're all back east, but, you know, we're pretty close. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank's screen savers. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best they've got. What do you do to relax? Pretty much I read a lot. So, reading, meditating, sometimes praying. But, basically reading. How are you at controlling your temper? I'm very good at controlling my temper. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? I really can't remember. I haven't argued with anyone in such a long time. It's just not a prudent thing to do. It's only going to cause you stress. So, I don't. I don't make that a part of my daily ritual. So, I can't even remember the last time I argued with someone. Tell me about a situation that you wish you were in differently. Hmm. All right. I'm not sure right now on that one. What's something you feel comfortable doing? I don't feel guilty about anything. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. Let's see. Probably moving away from East Coast to West Coast, being away from my family. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. There's nothing that I wish to erase from my memory. Everything that's there is there for a reason, and I accept it that way. And so, that's just how I see it. So, it's just a part of your life. It's part of the journey that you take, and there's no reason for me to try to erase anything that's already happened. It's just a part of me. It makes me the person I am. Thank you. Thank you. Have you ever served in the military? Yes, I was in the Navy. How old were you when you joined the military? 25 years old. Why did you decide to join the military? I wanted to serve my country. I felt obligated in some way. My family is... I have a lot of people in my family that have been in the military, but I felt obligated to be one of those who protected the country as well. Are you happy with yourself? Very happy. Okay. Did you ever see combat? No, I didn't. All right. Thank you. How easy was it for you to go back to civilian life? Not really easy. It took a little getting used to again. It's something you miss for a while, so you have to just rearrange yourself to that type of life again. It wasn't as easy, but it was doable. All right. What did you do after the military? I went back to school. Okay. How did serving in the military change you? It made me more disciplined. It gave me more of an appreciation for my country. And it made me put things into priority with regard to life, you know, life events, and how I do things, how I see things, opened up my eyes to a bigger world. And it helped me in those respects. How have you been feeling lately? I've been okay, just a little tired because I've been sick recently, but other than that, I've been okay. How do you know this country? I've been here for a few years. Have you had any changes in your behavior and thoughts lately? No. Okay. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? It's pretty easy. I don't toss and turn. If I'm sleepy, I'll go back. I'll go to sleep immediately, so it's not an issue right now. What are you like when you don't sleep well? I can get groggy, a little irritable. But that's about it. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No. Always. When was the last time you felt really happy? Probably when I was with my family back east a couple of months ago. That's great. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? My father and my mother. Tell me more about that. They've just been a pretty good example of what I've been through. Someone should grow up to be a... They put morals and they put standards in us and they live their life with integrity. So they are my examples for life right now. How do your best friends describe you? Playful, fun to be with, determined, inclusive. Inquisitive, creative. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Did a recent photo shoot of some clients at the beach and we had a really pretty good time doing that project. A lot of creativity, a lot of thought went into it and it was real fun. I enjoyed that. What do you like most about your life? What are you most proud of in your life? The fact that I've managed to achieve what I've done for education and my career status as well as the areas that I've worked in with photography and with helping other people out. Service to my country. Okay, I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Thank you. Goodbye. Goodbye. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . And then you can go on to the other computer. If you just give me one sec, I'll give you some instructions on what to do next.