All right. Hi, I'm Ellie. Thanks for coming in today. I was created to talk to people in a safe and secure environment. I'm not a therapist, but I'm here to learn about people and would love to learn about you. I'll ask a few questions to get us started. And please feel free to tell me anything. Your answers are totally confidential. Are you okay with this? Yes, I am. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm fine, and yourself? That's good. Where are you from originally? I'm from Long Beach, California. What are some things you do? What are some things you really like about LA? I love the weather. I love different things that LA has to offer, like food and different events that they always have, especially during the summer months. What are some things you don't really like about LA? I hate the traffic. I see what you mean. I can see the sights, but I don't know what I want. Do you travel a lot? Yes, I do. What do you enjoy about traveling? I just love to experience new things. This world has so many things to offer, and I don't want to be just enclosed in a box when there's so much out there that I can see. That's important to me. I'd like to hear about one of your trips. What's one of your most memorable experiences? What did you study at school? I studied criminal justice. What do you do now? I do maintenance for a police station. And it is located in West LA. What's your dream job? My dream job, honestly, is to become a police officer. Do you consider yourself more shy or outgoing? When I was younger, more shy. But as I've gotten older, I've grown out of that. So now I consider myself more outgoing. Why? I think that has come along with age. I think that has come along with my personality. Because with age, comes more responsibility. You have to learn how to talk to people. You have to learn how to talk to different types of people. Along with that, the shyness kind of goes away by default. Tell me about your relationship with your family. Oh man. I honestly cannot ask for a better relationship with my family at all. I could not ask for a better relationship with my family at all. I have great parents. I have great siblings. I have four sisters. Everything about them is great. Sometimes when I'm feeling tense, I turn on the fish tank screensaver. Hey, I know it's not Hawaii, but it's the best I've got. What do you do to relax? To relax, honestly, well, my favorite music artist is Sade. So, what I like to do is turn off the TV. If it's hot, I'll turn the fan on and I'll listen to some Sade. How are you at controlling your temper? Very well, actually. I don't have a temper. I've never had a temper, so I find it quite easy to control it whenever I find myself getting mad. But since I don't have a temper, it's pretty easy to control it. When was the last time you argued with someone, and what was it about? Can you tell me about that? Probably a week ago. Yeah, I would say about a week ago, it was with one of my coworkers. Because they felt that I treated them differently than my other coworkers, which actually is not the case. Tell me about a situation that you wish you would handle differently. Alright. What's something you feel guilty about? Sometimes I feel guilty when I come into work a few minutes late, but I sign in as if I signed in on time for work. I'm not guilty. Tell me about the hardest decision you've ever had to make. The hardest decision I've ever had to make was deciding whether or not if I wanted to join the military. I wouldn't necessarily say I changed my mind, but I was very curious about it, but I wasn't sure. But, um... I made the decision to go, even though it was scary. But that, honestly, was probably my hardest decision to make. Alright. Tell me about an event or something that you wish you could erase from your memory. Um... Okay, one event was when I was... I was... I was very little. And the church that I was going to at the time, uh... They had... They had set up, um, this event where a bus would come and pick up all the kids and take them to Chuck E. Cheese. Um... What ended up happening was the bus never, never, like, never showed up. So we were sitting there for literally about an hour and a half, close to two hours. And the bus never showed up, and everybody was heartbroken. Um... I know that's not really anything major, but, I mean, I wish I could take that away. Have you ever served in the military? Yes, I have. How old were you when you joined the military? When I joined the military, I was 21. Why'd you decide to go to the military? I was 21. Why'd you decide to go to the military? Um... To be honest, I wanted a change in my life. I wanted something different. I felt like the military would be a really great stepping stone, just in life, period. Um... As well as, um, they help... They pretty much pay for school. Um... So that... And plus, I got... I got to travel. So... And... And, you know, um... It's always a great opportunity to serve my country. You know? Are you happy you did that? I am very happy that I joined the Navy. Yes. Uh-huh. Did you ever see combat? I did not see any combat. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. How easy was it for you to go back to civilian life? Honestly, it was kind of a struggle. Um... It wasn't that easy at first. Um... Easy... Well, I mean, it wasn't difficult, but it was a struggle because it's two different lifestyles. You know? The nat... Well, the military and civilian lifestyles are two completely different lifestyles. So... Um... It was a lot more freedom going back and trying to... The most difficult part was trying to find a job because I had came out right when the economy crashed. So, that was the most difficult part of my transition. Uh-huh. What did you do after the military? I went to school and... Yeah. I had a student job at the... Uh-huh. How did serving in the military change you? It changed me because I feel like it's given me more drive in life to go after the things that I want. Um... I feel like I'm slightly more, more disciplined. Um... Uh... Honestly, I feel like after during the military, I'm more motivated to do more things. I've been joining the military. I speak up for... For myself a lot more often. Okay. How have you been feeling lately? Lately, I've been feeling great. Um... I don't have any complaints. Um... I'm happy with my life. So... Lately, yeah, I've... I've been feeling very happy and... And satisfied. That's good. Yeah. Have you noticed any changes in your behavior or thoughts lately? Not necessarily in my thoughts, but in my behavior, I'm finding that I'm taking more of an initiative with work and with my peers and my family. I'm sorry to hear that. How easy is it for you to get a good night's sleep? On a regular basis, I find it pretty easy. What are you like when you don't sleep well? When I don't sleep well, I'm not really different. I just feel like I have a little less energy throughout the day, but that's really the only thing. I'm not really the only difference. I'm still the same person. Okay. Have you ever been diagnosed with PTSD? No, I have not. Okay. Have you been diagnosed with depression? No, I have not. Alright. When was the last time you felt really happy? The last time I felt really happy was probably when I got my paycheck yesterday. That's good. Who's someone that's been a positive influence in your life? Someone who's been a positive influence in my life? Probably my father. He's always pointed me in the right direction. He's always given me some great advice about things in life in general. I can always go to him. How would your best friend describe you? My best friend would describe me as funny, outgoing, nice. Sincere. Yeah. Tell me about something you did recently that you really enjoyed. Something I've done recently that I've really enjoyed? There was a volleyball tournament down in Long Beach. It was the World Series of Beach Volleyball. And I enjoyed going to that because it was all free. They gave out free food. They gave out free drinks. It was on TV. It was on NBC. I got to see Kerry Walsh, so that made me really happy. Nice. What are you most proud of in your life? What am I most proud of? I'm most proud to say that I was in the military and I served my country. That's good. Thank you. Okay. I think I've asked everything I need to. Thanks for sharing your thoughts with me. Bye. Thank you. Thank you. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. Bye. All right, we have our host now. Please welcome Sir32. He's going to give us some words of advice some of which I recommend. Okay. Yeah. Give me a minute. All right.